demo-skills/ascii-art/SKILL.md, before:

# ASCII Art Skill

Generate creative ASCII art for text, logos, and decorative elements.

## Capabilities

- Convert text to large ASCII art banners
- Create decorative borders and dividers
- Generate simple ASCII diagrams and illustrations

## Text Banner Styles

Use these character patterns for text banners:

### Block Style

```
█████╗ ██████╗  ██████╗
██╔══██╗██╔══██╗██╔════╝
███████║██████╔╝██║
██╔══██║██╔══██╗██║
██║  ██║██████╔╝╚██████╗
╚═╝  ╚═╝╚═════╝  ╚═════╝
```

### Simple Style

```
 ___  ____   ___
/ _ \| __ ) / __|
| |_| |  _ \| (__
 \___/|____/ \___|
```

### Shadow Style

```
░█████╗░██████╗░░█████╗░
██╔══██╗██╔══██╗██╔══██╗
███████║██████╦╝██║░░╚═╝
██╔══██║██╔══██╗██║░░██╗
██║░░██║██████╦╝╚█████╔╝
╚═╝░░╚═╝╚═════╝░░╚════╝░
```

## Decorative Elements

### Borders

```
╔══════════════════════════════════════╗
║                                      ║
╚══════════════════════════════════════╝

┌──────────────────────────────────────┐
│                                      │
└──────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Dividers

```
════════════════════════════════════════
────────────────────────────────────────
▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀
░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░
```

## Usage Guidelines

- Keep ASCII art readable in monospace fonts
- Consider terminal width (typically 80-120 characters)
- Use consistent character sets within a piece
- Add whitespace for visual clarity

Commit message:

Move pyyaml to skills extra and add demo-skill validation
**Changes:**

1. **Move pyyaml dependency to skills extra:**
   - Moved pyyaml from main dependencies to optional [skills] extra
   - Added pyyaml back to deptry ignore list (now optional)
   - Added weakincentives[skills] to dev dependency group

2. **Add YAML frontmatter to all demo-skills:**
   - Added proper frontmatter to python-style skill
   - Added proper frontmatter to ascii-art skill
   - Added proper frontmatter to code-review skill
   - All frontmatter follows Agent Skills spec with name and description fields

3. **Add demo-skills validation tests:**
   - Added TestDemoSkills class with individual tests for each skill
   - Added test_all_demo_skills_have_valid_names to validate all skills automatically
   - Tests skip gracefully if demo-skills directory not found

4. **Exclude demo-skills from markdown formatting:**
   - Added demo-skills to EXCLUDED_PARTS in build/run_mdformat.py
   - YAML frontmatter is incompatible with current mdformat version

**Result:** All demo-skills now have valid frontmatter and are tested
to ensure they conform to the Agent Skills specification.

demo-skills/ascii-art/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: ascii-art
description: Generate creative ASCII art for text banners, logos, and decorative elements using various character patterns and styles.
---

# ASCII Art Skill

Generate creative ASCII art for text, logos, and decorative elements.

## Capabilities

- Convert text to large ASCII art banners
- Create decorative borders and dividers
- Generate simple ASCII diagrams and illustrations

## Text Banner Styles

Use these character patterns for text banners:

### Block Style

```
█████╗ ██████╗  ██████╗
██╔══██╗██╔══██╗██╔════╝
███████║██████╔╝██║
██╔══██║██╔══██╗██║
██║  ██║██████╔╝╚██████╗
╚═╝  ╚═╝╚═════╝  ╚═════╝
```

### Simple Style

```
 ___  ____   ___
/ _ \| __ ) / __|
| |_| |  _ \| (__
 \___/|____/ \___|
```

### Shadow Style

```
░█████╗░██████╗░░█████╗░
██╔══██╗██╔══██╗██╔══██╗
███████║██████╦╝██║░░╚═╝
██╔══██║██╔══██╗██║░░██╗
██║░░██║██████╦╝╚█████╔╝
╚═╝░░╚═╝╚═════╝░░╚════╝░
```

## Decorative Elements

### Borders

```
╔══════════════════════════════════════╗
║                                      ║
╚══════════════════════════════════════╝

┌──────────────────────────────────────┐
│                                      │
└──────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Dividers

```
════════════════════════════════════════
────────────────────────────────────────
▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀
░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░
```

## Usage Guidelines

- Keep ASCII art readable in monospace fonts
- Consider terminal width (typically 80-120 characters)
- Use consistent character sets within a piece
- Add whitespace for visual clarity
