guides/code-review-agent.md, before:

# Code Reviewer Example

This document describes the `code_reviewer_example.py` script that ships with
the library. The script assembles a full-featured code review agent
demonstrating prompt composition, progressive disclosure, workspace tools,
planning, and the `MainLoop` pattern in one place.

## Rationale and Scope

- **Purpose**: Canonical end-to-end walkthrough for a review agent exercising
  prompt templates, overrides, workspace tooling, and auto-optimization.
- **Scope**: Focused on the bundled `sunfish` repository fixture under
  `test-repositories/`. Mounts are read-only with a 600 KB payload cap.
- **Principles**: Declarative prompt assembly, ergonomic overrides (tagged by
  namespace/key), reusable planning/workspace tools, and full observability via
  event subscribers.

## Transactional Tool Execution

The code reviewer benefits from WINK's transactional tool execution. Every tool
call (reading files, updating plans, writing workspace state) is wrapped in a
transaction. If a tool fails:

- Session state (the review plan, visibility overrides) rolls back automatically
- Filesystem changes are undone
- The agent continues from a known-good state

This is particularly valuable when the agent is navigating a large codebase.
A failed `read_file` or interrupted `planning_update_step` doesn't corrupt the
review session. The agent's plan remains consistent, and the model can retry
or take a different approach without debugging "what state are we actually in?"

No explicit error handling code is required—the framework handles rollback
automatically. See [Sessions](../specs/SESSIONS.md) for details.

## Runtime Architecture

The example uses a two-layer design:

- `CodeReviewLoop` extends `MainLoop[ReviewTurnParams, ReviewResponse]` for
  request handling with auto-optimization
- `CodeReviewApp` owns the interactive REPL and delegates execution to the loop

### CodeReviewLoop

Implements the `MainLoop` protocol with these responsibilities:

- **Persistent Session**: Creates a single `Session` at construction time,
  reused across all `execute()` calls
- **Auto-Optimization**: Runs workspace digest optimization automatically on
  first request if no `WorkspaceDigest` exists in the session
- **Deadline Management**: Applies a default 5-minute deadline to each request
- **Prompt Binding**: Creates and binds prompts via `create_prompt()`

```python
class CodeReviewLoop(MainLoop[ReviewTurnParams, ReviewResponse]):
    def create_prompt(self, request: ReviewTurnParams) -> Prompt[ReviewResponse]: ...
    def create_session(self) -> Session: ...
    def execute(self, request: ReviewTurnParams, *, budget=None, deadline=None) -> PromptResponse[ReviewResponse]: ...
```

### CodeReviewApp

Owns user interaction:

- Creates an `Dispatcher` with logging subscribers
- Instantiates `CodeReviewLoop` with the adapter and bus
- Runs the interactive REPL loop
- Dumps session state on exit

### Startup Sequence

1. `configure_logging()` sets up logging
1. `build_adapter()` creates the OpenAI adapter (requires `OPENAI_API_KEY`)
1. `CodeReviewApp` creates the event bus and `CodeReviewLoop`
1. `CodeReviewLoop.__init__`:
   - Creates a persistent `Session` via `build_logged_session()`
   - Builds the `PromptTemplate` via `build_task_prompt()`
   - Seeds prompt overrides via `_seed_overrides()`
1. `CodeReviewApp.run()` starts the REPL

### REPL Loop

Each turn:

1. Reads user input
1. Handles exit commands (`exit`, `quit`, empty input)
1. Creates `ReviewTurnParams(request=...)` from user input
1. Calls `loop.execute()` which:
   - Auto-optimizes workspace digest if needed (first request only)
   - Applies default deadline
   - Delegates to `MainLoop.execute()` for prompt evaluation
1. Renders response via `_render_response_payload`
1. Prints plan snapshot via `render_plan_snapshot`

On exit, dumps session state to `snapshots/` via `dump_session_tree`.

## Data Types

### ReviewGuidance

Default guidance parameters for the review brief section.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReviewGuidance:
    focus: str = "Identify potential issues, risks, and follow-up questions..."
```

### ReviewTurnParams

Runtime parameters provided per turn.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReviewTurnParams:
    request: str  # User-provided review request
```

### ReviewResponse

Structured output from the agent.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReviewResponse:
    summary: str
    issues: list[str]
    next_steps: list[str]
```

### ReferenceParams

Parameters for the reference documentation section.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReferenceParams:
    project_name: str = "sunfish"
```

## Prompt Composition

`build_task_prompt` produces `PromptTemplate[ReviewResponse]` with:

- Namespace: `examples/code-review`
- Key: `code-review-session`
- Name: `sunfish_code_review_agent`

### Sections (in order)

1. **Code Review Brief** (`MarkdownSection[ReviewGuidance]`)

   - Template describing tooling and output format
   - Key: `code-review-brief`

1. **Workspace Digest** (`WorkspaceDigestSection`)

   - Cached workspace notes from session
   - Auto-populated on first request via optimization

1. **Reference Documentation** (`MarkdownSection[ReferenceParams]`)

   - Progressive disclosure section (starts summarized)
   - Key: `reference-docs`
   - Visibility: `SectionVisibility.SUMMARY`
   - Summary: "Documentation for ${project_name} is available..."

1. **Planning Tools** (`PlanningToolsSection`)

   - Strategy: `PlanningStrategy.PLAN_ACT_REFLECT`
   - `accepts_overrides=True`

1. **Workspace Tools** (conditional)

   - `PodmanSandboxSection` if Podman connection available
   - `VfsToolsSection` fallback otherwise
   - Both use `_sunfish_mounts()` configuration

1. **Review Request** (`MarkdownSection[ReviewTurnParams]`)

   - Template: `${request}`
   - Key: `review-request`

### Mount Configuration

```python
SUNFISH_MOUNT_INCLUDE_GLOBS = (
    "*.md", "*.py", "*.txt", "*.yml", "*.yaml", "*.toml",
    "*.gitignore", "*.json", "*.cfg", "*.ini", "*.sh", "*.6",
)
SUNFISH_MOUNT_EXCLUDE_GLOBS = ("**/*.pickle", "**/*.png", "**/*.bmp")
SUNFISH_MOUNT_MAX_BYTES = 600_000
```

## Progressive Disclosure

The Reference Documentation section demonstrates progressive disclosure:

1. Section starts with `visibility=SectionVisibility.SUMMARY`
1. Model sees only the summary text initially
1. Model can call `open_sections` tool to expand
1. `MainLoop` handles `VisibilityExpansionRequired` internally
1. Full section content becomes visible on retry

## Auto-Optimization

The example automatically optimizes the workspace digest on first use:

1. `CodeReviewLoop.execute()` checks if `WorkspaceDigest` exists in session
1. If missing, calls `_run_optimization()` before processing the request
1. Creates a child session via `build_logged_session(parent=...)`
1. Builds `OptimizationContext` with adapter, bus, store, tag
1. Runs `WorkspaceDigestOptimizer` with `PersistenceScope.SESSION`
1. Digest is stored in the session for subsequent requests

This eliminates the need for manual optimization commands.

## Overrides

### Override Storage

- Store: `LocalPromptOverridesStore` (default: `~/.weakincentives/prompts`)
- Scoped by: namespace + prompt key + tag
- Seeded once at startup via `store.seed(prompt, tag=...)`

### Tag Resolution

Override tag is resolved in order:

1. Explicit `override_tag` argument
1. `CODE_REVIEW_PROMPT_TAG` environment variable
1. Default: `"latest"`

## Deadlines

Each request has a deadline to prevent runaway execution:

```python
DEFAULT_DEADLINE_MINUTES = 5

def _default_deadline() -> Deadline:
    return Deadline(
        expires_at=datetime.now(UTC) + timedelta(minutes=DEFAULT_DEADLINE_MINUTES)
    )
```

Custom deadlines can be passed to `execute()` if needed.

## Observability

### Event Subscribers

Attached via `attach_logging_subscribers(bus)` from `examples.logging`:

| Event | Output |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `PromptRendered` | Full prompt text with label |
| `ToolInvoked` | Params, result, payload, token usage |
| `PromptExecuted` | Token usage summary |

### Plan Snapshots

`render_plan_snapshot` formats the current plan:

```
Objective: <objective> (status: <status>)
- <step_id> [<status>] <title> — details: <details>; notes: <notes>
```

## Running the Example

```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-... uv run python code_reviewer_example.py
```

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Required | Default | Description |
| ------------------------ | -------- | --------- | -------------- |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | Yes | - | OpenAI API key |
| `OPENAI_MODEL` | No | `gpt-5.2` | Model to use |
| `CODE_REVIEW_PROMPT_TAG` | No | `latest` | Overrides tag |

### REPL Commands

| Input | Action |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------ |
| Non-empty text | Submit as review request |
| `exit` / `quit` / empty | Terminate REPL |

### Output

- Intro banner with configuration summary
- `[prompt]` blocks showing rendered prompts (via logging)
- `[tool]` blocks showing tool invocations (via logging)
- `--- Agent Response ---` with formatted output
- `--- Plan Snapshot ---` with current plan state

## Shared Utilities

The example imports several helpers from the `examples` package:

| Function | Purpose |
| ---------------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| `build_logged_session` | Create session with logging tags |
| `configure_logging` | Set up console logging |
| `render_plan_snapshot` | Format plan state for display |
| `resolve_override_tag` | Resolve tag from arg/env/default |
| `attach_logging_subscribers` | Attach event logging to bus |

## Key Files

| File | Purpose |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `code_reviewer_example.py` | Main script |
| `examples/` | Shared example utilities |
| `test-repositories/sunfish/` | Mounted repository fixture |
| `snapshots/` | Session dump output directory |
| `~/.weakincentives/prompts/` | Default overrides storage |

Commit message:

Rename 'bus' to 'dispatcher' across the entire codebase
Replace all instances of the confusing 'bus' naming with the more
descriptive 'dispatcher' to match the actual class name (InProcessDispatcher,
TelemetryDispatcher, etc.). This improves code clarity and consistency.

Changes include:
- Session.__init__ parameter: bus -> dispatcher
- Session._bus -> Session._dispatcher
- Session.clone() parameter: bus -> dispatcher
- _attach_to_dispatcher parameter: bus -> dispatcher
- Test fixtures and variables renamed accordingly
- Documentation and examples updated
- All tool section clone() methods updated

guides/code-review-agent.md, after:

# Code Reviewer Example

This document describes the `code_reviewer_example.py` script that ships with
the library. The script assembles a full-featured code review agent
demonstrating prompt composition, progressive disclosure, workspace tools,
planning, and the `MainLoop` pattern in one place.

## Rationale and Scope

- **Purpose**: Canonical end-to-end walkthrough for a review agent exercising
  prompt templates, overrides, workspace tooling, and auto-optimization.
- **Scope**: Focused on the bundled `sunfish` repository fixture under
  `test-repositories/`. Mounts are read-only with a 600 KB payload cap.
- **Principles**: Declarative prompt assembly, ergonomic overrides (tagged by
  namespace/key), reusable planning/workspace tools, and full observability via
  event subscribers.

## Transactional Tool Execution

The code reviewer benefits from WINK's transactional tool execution. Every tool
call (reading files, updating plans, writing workspace state) is wrapped in a
transaction. If a tool fails:

- Session state (the review plan, visibility overrides) rolls back automatically
- Filesystem changes are undone
- The agent continues from a known-good state

This is particularly valuable when the agent is navigating a large codebase.
A failed `read_file` or interrupted `planning_update_step` doesn't corrupt the
review session. The agent's plan remains consistent, and the model can retry
or take a different approach without debugging "what state are we actually in?"

No explicit error handling code is required—the framework handles rollback
automatically. See [Sessions](../specs/SESSIONS.md) for details.

## Runtime Architecture

The example uses a two-layer design:

- `CodeReviewLoop` extends `MainLoop[ReviewTurnParams, ReviewResponse]` for
  request handling with auto-optimization
- `CodeReviewApp` owns the interactive REPL and delegates execution to the loop

### CodeReviewLoop

Implements the `MainLoop` protocol with these responsibilities:

- **Persistent Session**: Creates a single `Session` at construction time,
  reused across all `execute()` calls
- **Auto-Optimization**: Runs workspace digest optimization automatically on
  first request if no `WorkspaceDigest` exists in the session
- **Deadline Management**: Applies a default 5-minute deadline to each request
- **Prompt Binding**: Creates and binds prompts via `create_prompt()`

```python
class CodeReviewLoop(MainLoop[ReviewTurnParams, ReviewResponse]):
    def create_prompt(self, request: ReviewTurnParams) -> Prompt[ReviewResponse]: ...
    def create_session(self) -> Session: ...
    def execute(self, request: ReviewTurnParams, *, budget=None, deadline=None) -> PromptResponse[ReviewResponse]: ...
```

### CodeReviewApp

Owns user interaction:

- Creates an `Dispatcher` with logging subscribers
- Instantiates `CodeReviewLoop` with the adapter and dispatcher
- Runs the interactive REPL loop
- Dumps session state on exit

### Startup Sequence

1. `configure_logging()` sets up logging
1. `build_adapter()` creates the OpenAI adapter (requires `OPENAI_API_KEY`)
1. `CodeReviewApp` creates the event dispatcher and `CodeReviewLoop`
1. `CodeReviewLoop.__init__`:
   - Creates a persistent `Session` via `build_logged_session()`
   - Builds the `PromptTemplate` via `build_task_prompt()`
   - Seeds prompt overrides via `_seed_overrides()`
1. `CodeReviewApp.run()` starts the REPL

### REPL Loop

Each turn:

1. Reads user input
1. Handles exit commands (`exit`, `quit`, empty input)
1. Creates `ReviewTurnParams(request=...)` from user input
1. Calls `loop.execute()` which:
   - Auto-optimizes workspace digest if needed (first request only)
   - Applies default deadline
   - Delegates to `MainLoop.execute()` for prompt evaluation
1. Renders response via `_render_response_payload`
1. Prints plan snapshot via `render_plan_snapshot`

On exit, dumps session state to `snapshots/` via `dump_session_tree`.

## Data Types

### ReviewGuidance

Default guidance parameters for the review brief section.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReviewGuidance:
    focus: str = "Identify potential issues, risks, and follow-up questions..."
```

### ReviewTurnParams

Runtime parameters provided per turn.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReviewTurnParams:
    request: str  # User-provided review request
```

### ReviewResponse

Structured output from the agent.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReviewResponse:
    summary: str
    issues: list[str]
    next_steps: list[str]
```

### ReferenceParams

Parameters for the reference documentation section.

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReferenceParams:
    project_name: str = "sunfish"
```

## Prompt Composition

`build_task_prompt` produces `PromptTemplate[ReviewResponse]` with:

- Namespace: `examples/code-review`
- Key: `code-review-session`
- Name: `sunfish_code_review_agent`

### Sections (in order)

1. **Code Review Brief** (`MarkdownSection[ReviewGuidance]`)

   - Template describing tooling and output format
   - Key: `code-review-brief`

1. **Workspace Digest** (`WorkspaceDigestSection`)

   - Cached workspace notes from session
   - Auto-populated on first request via optimization

1. **Reference Documentation** (`MarkdownSection[ReferenceParams]`)

   - Progressive disclosure section (starts summarized)
   - Key: `reference-docs`
   - Visibility: `SectionVisibility.SUMMARY`
   - Summary: "Documentation for ${project_name} is available..."

1. **Planning Tools** (`PlanningToolsSection`)

   - Strategy: `PlanningStrategy.PLAN_ACT_REFLECT`
   - `accepts_overrides=True`

1. **Workspace Tools** (conditional)

   - `PodmanSandboxSection` if Podman connection available
   - `VfsToolsSection` fallback otherwise
   - Both use `_sunfish_mounts()` configuration

1. **Review Request** (`MarkdownSection[ReviewTurnParams]`)

   - Template: `${request}`
   - Key: `review-request`

### Mount Configuration

```python
SUNFISH_MOUNT_INCLUDE_GLOBS = (
    "*.md", "*.py", "*.txt", "*.yml", "*.yaml", "*.toml",
    "*.gitignore", "*.json", "*.cfg", "*.ini", "*.sh", "*.6",
)
SUNFISH_MOUNT_EXCLUDE_GLOBS = ("**/*.pickle", "**/*.png", "**/*.bmp")
SUNFISH_MOUNT_MAX_BYTES = 600_000
```

## Progressive Disclosure

The Reference Documentation section demonstrates progressive disclosure:

1. Section starts with `visibility=SectionVisibility.SUMMARY`
1. Model sees only the summary text initially
1. Model can call `open_sections` tool to expand
1. `MainLoop` handles `VisibilityExpansionRequired` internally
1. Full section content becomes visible on retry

## Auto-Optimization

The example automatically optimizes the workspace digest on first use:

1. `CodeReviewLoop.execute()` checks if `WorkspaceDigest` exists in session
1. If missing, calls `_run_optimization()` before processing the request
1. Creates a child session via `build_logged_session(parent=...)`
1. Builds `OptimizationContext` with adapter, dispatcher, store, tag
1. Runs `WorkspaceDigestOptimizer` with `PersistenceScope.SESSION`
1. Digest is stored in the session for subsequent requests

This eliminates the need for manual optimization commands.

## Overrides

### Override Storage

- Store: `LocalPromptOverridesStore` (default: `~/.weakincentives/prompts`)
- Scoped by: namespace + prompt key + tag
- Seeded once at startup via `store.seed(prompt, tag=...)`

### Tag Resolution

Override tag is resolved in order:

1. Explicit `override_tag` argument
1. `CODE_REVIEW_PROMPT_TAG` environment variable
1. Default: `"latest"`

## Deadlines

Each request has a deadline to prevent runaway execution:

```python
DEFAULT_DEADLINE_MINUTES = 5

def _default_deadline() -> Deadline:
    return Deadline(
        expires_at=datetime.now(UTC) + timedelta(minutes=DEFAULT_DEADLINE_MINUTES)
    )
```

Custom deadlines can be passed to `execute()` if needed.

## Observability

### Event Subscribers

Attached via `attach_logging_subscribers(dispatcher)` from `examples.logging`:

| Event | Output |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `PromptRendered` | Full prompt text with label |
| `ToolInvoked` | Params, result, payload, token usage |
| `PromptExecuted` | Token usage summary |

### Plan Snapshots

`render_plan_snapshot` formats the current plan:

```
Objective: <objective> (status: <status>)
- <step_id> [<status>] <title> — details: <details>; notes: <notes>
```

## Running the Example

```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-... uv run python code_reviewer_example.py
```

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Required | Default | Description |
| ------------------------ | -------- | --------- | -------------- |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | Yes | - | OpenAI API key |
| `OPENAI_MODEL` | No | `gpt-5.2` | Model to use |
| `CODE_REVIEW_PROMPT_TAG` | No | `latest` | Overrides tag |

### REPL Commands

| Input | Action |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------ |
| Non-empty text | Submit as review request |
| `exit` / `quit` / empty | Terminate REPL |

### Output

- Intro banner with configuration summary
- `[prompt]` blocks showing rendered prompts (via logging)
- `[tool]` blocks showing tool invocations (via logging)
- `--- Agent Response ---` with formatted output
- `--- Plan Snapshot ---` with current plan state

## Shared Utilities

The example imports several helpers from the `examples` package:

| Function | Purpose |
| ---------------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| `build_logged_session` | Create session with logging tags |
| `configure_logging` | Set up console logging |
| `render_plan_snapshot` | Format plan state for display |
| `resolve_override_tag` | Resolve tag from arg/env/default |
| `attach_logging_subscribers` | Attach event logging to dispatcher |

## Key Files

| File | Purpose |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `code_reviewer_example.py` | Main script |
| `examples/` | Shared example utilities |
| `test-repositories/sunfish/` | Mounted repository fixture |
| `snapshots/` | Session dump output directory |
| `~/.weakincentives/prompts/` | Default overrides storage |
