guides/query.md, before:

# Querying Debug Bundles

This guide covers `wink query`, a SQL-based tool for exploring debug bundles.
It's the primary way to analyze what happened during an agent execution.

*Canonical spec: [specs/WINK_QUERY.md](../specs/WINK_QUERY.md)*

## Prerequisites

Install the CLI extra:

```bash
pip install "weakincentives[wink]"
```

## Why SQL?

Debug bundles contain structured data—logs, tool calls, session state, errors.
SQL provides a familiar, powerful interface for filtering and aggregating this
data without writing custom scripts. The query command loads your bundle into
SQLite, giving you the full power of SQL for analysis.

## Basic Usage

```bash
# Discover what tables are available
wink query ./bundle.zip --schema

# Run a query (JSON output by default)
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM errors"

# Get formatted table output
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM errors" --table
```

Always start with `--schema` to see what tables exist and what columns they
have.

## Schema Discovery

The `--schema` flag outputs JSON describing all tables, views, and columns:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip --schema
```

Output includes:

- **tables**: Each table with name, description, row count, and column info
- **hints**: Ready-to-use JSON extraction patterns and common queries

The hints section is especially useful—it shows you exactly how to query nested
JSON data:

```json
{
  "hints": {
    "json_extraction": [
      "json_extract(context, '$.tool_name')",
      "json_extract(params, '$.command')",
      "json_extract(params, '$.path')"
    ],
    "common_queries": {
      "all_tools": "SELECT tool_name, source, success FROM tool_calls ORDER BY seq, rowid",
      "native_tools": "SELECT tool_name, params FROM tool_calls WHERE source = 'native' ORDER BY seq",
      "tool_timeline": "SELECT * FROM tool_timeline WHERE duration_ms > 1000",
      "error_context": "SELECT timestamp, message, context FROM logs WHERE level = 'ERROR'"
    }
  }
}
```

## Tables

### Core Tables

These tables are always present:

| Table | Source | What It Contains |
|-------|--------|------------------|
| `manifest` | `manifest.json` | Bundle ID, status, timestamps |
| `logs` | `logs/app.jsonl` | All log entries with event names and context |
| `tool_calls` | derived from logs | Unified tool invocations (native + custom) |
| `errors` | aggregated | All errors from logs, error.json, and failed tools |
| `session_slices` | `session/after.jsonl` | Session state items |
| `files` | `filesystem/` | Workspace files with paths and content |
| `config` | `config.json` | Configuration as flattened key-value pairs |
| `metrics` | `metrics.json` | Token usage and timing metrics |
| `run_context` | `run_context.json` | Request ID, session ID, trace ID |

### Optional Tables

| Table | Present When |
|-------|--------------|
| `prompt_overrides` | `prompt_overrides.json` exists |
| `eval` | Bundle is from EvalLoop |

### Dynamic Slice Tables

For each slice type in your session, a dedicated table is created:

```
slice_{normalized_type_name}
```

Example: A slice type `myapp.state:AgentPlan` becomes `slice_agentplan`. These
tables have columns inferred from the JSON structure, making it easy to query
typed session state.

## Views

Pre-built views for common analysis patterns:

| View | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `tool_timeline` | All tools ordered by execution sequence (native + custom) |
| `error_summary` | Errors with truncated tracebacks |

Use views directly in queries:

```sql
SELECT * FROM tool_timeline WHERE duration_ms > 1000
SELECT * FROM error_summary
```

## Common Queries

### Finding Errors

```sql
-- All errors with their source
SELECT source, error_type, message FROM errors

-- Error logs with timestamps
SELECT timestamp, message FROM logs WHERE level = 'ERROR'

-- Failed tool calls
SELECT tool_name, error_code, params FROM tool_calls WHERE success = 0
```

### Analyzing Tool Performance

```sql
-- Tool call counts and average duration
SELECT tool_name, COUNT(*) as calls, AVG(duration_ms) as avg_ms
FROM tool_calls
GROUP BY tool_name
ORDER BY calls DESC

-- Slowest tool calls
SELECT tool_name, duration_ms, params
FROM tool_calls
ORDER BY duration_ms DESC
LIMIT 10
```

### Inspecting Session State

```sql
-- What slice types exist
SELECT slice_type, COUNT(*) FROM session_slices GROUP BY slice_type

-- Query a specific slice table (created dynamically)
SELECT * FROM slice_agentplan
```

### Working with Logs

```sql
-- Find specific events
SELECT timestamp, event, context FROM logs WHERE event LIKE 'tool.%'

-- Extract nested JSON data
SELECT
    timestamp,
    json_extract(context, '$.tool_name') as tool,
    json_extract(context, '$.duration_ms') as duration
FROM logs
WHERE event = 'tool.execution.complete'
```

### Querying Tool Calls

The `tool_calls` table provides a unified view of all tool invocations:

- **Native tools** (`source = 'native'`): Claude Code's Bash, Read, Write, etc.
- **Custom tools** (`source = 'custom'`): MCP-bridged and custom tool handlers

```sql
-- All tools in execution order
SELECT tool_name, source, success FROM tool_calls ORDER BY seq, rowid

-- Native tools only (Claude Code's built-in tools)
SELECT tool_name, params, success
FROM tool_calls
WHERE source = 'native'
ORDER BY seq

-- Custom tools only (MCP/custom handlers)
SELECT tool_name, duration_ms, result
FROM tool_calls
WHERE source = 'custom'
```

The `seq` column provides ordering for native tools; use `seq, rowid` for
consistent ordering across all tools.

### Token Usage

```sql
-- Get token metrics
SELECT key, value FROM metrics
WHERE key IN ('input_tokens', 'output_tokens', 'total_ms')
```

### Searching Files

```sql
-- Find files containing specific text
SELECT path FROM files WHERE content LIKE '%TODO%'

-- Find files by extension
SELECT path, LENGTH(content) as size FROM files WHERE path LIKE '%.py'
```

## Output Formats

### JSON (Default)

Returns results as a JSON array:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM manifest"
# [{"bundle_id": "abc123", "status": "success", ...}]
```

Good for piping to `jq` or processing programmatically.

### Table

Human-readable ASCII table:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT source, error_type, message FROM errors" --table
```

```
source | error_type | message
-------|------------|--------
log    | ValueError | Invalid config
tool   | TimeoutErr | Request timed out
```

By default, long values are truncated. Use `--no-truncate` for full content:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM logs" --table --no-truncate
```

## Raw JSONL Export

For power users who prefer `jq` over SQL, export raw JSONL directly:

```bash
# Export logs (default)
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl

# Export session state
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl=session
```

Pipe to `jq` for filtering:

```bash
# Find specific events
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl | jq 'select(.event == "tool.execution.start")'

# Find session slices by type
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl=session | jq 'select(.__type__ | contains("Plan"))'
```

## Caching

The query command caches the SQLite database next to the bundle:

```
./bundle.zip           → input
./bundle.zip.sqlite    → cache
```

Cache is automatically invalidated when:

- Bundle modification time is newer than cache
- Schema version changes (after upgrades)

You don't need to manage the cache manually. Delete the `.sqlite` file if you
want to force a rebuild.

## Workflow Tips

**Start with schema**: Always run `--schema` first. The hints section shows you
exactly how to query the bundle.

**Use views first**: The pre-built views (`tool_timeline`, `error_summary`,
`native_tool_calls`) handle common patterns. Check these before writing custom
queries.

**Extract JSON early**: Log context and tool params are JSON. Extract the
fields you need in your SELECT:

```sql
SELECT
    timestamp,
    json_extract(context, '$.tool_name') as tool
FROM logs
```

**Filter then aggregate**: SQLite is fast, but filtering before aggregation
helps with large bundles:

```sql
SELECT tool_name, AVG(duration_ms)
FROM tool_calls
WHERE success = 1  -- Filter first
GROUP BY tool_name
```

## Debugging Scenarios

### "Why did the agent fail?"

```sql
-- Check the error summary
SELECT * FROM error_summary

-- Look at error logs with context
SELECT timestamp, message, context FROM logs WHERE level = 'ERROR'

-- Check if a tool failed
SELECT tool_name, error_code, params FROM tool_calls WHERE success = 0
```

### "Why was the agent slow?"

```sql
-- Find slow tool calls
SELECT * FROM tool_timeline WHERE duration_ms > 5000

-- Aggregate by tool
SELECT tool_name, COUNT(*), SUM(duration_ms) as total_ms
FROM tool_calls
GROUP BY tool_name
ORDER BY total_ms DESC
```

### "What did the agent actually do?"

```sql
-- Timeline of all tool calls (native + custom unified)
SELECT * FROM tool_timeline

-- Native tools only
SELECT tool_name, params FROM tool_calls WHERE source = 'native' ORDER BY seq

-- Custom tools only
SELECT tool_name, params, result FROM tool_calls WHERE source = 'custom'
```

### "What was the session state?"

```sql
-- List all slice types
SELECT DISTINCT slice_type FROM session_slices

-- Query specific slice (table name from schema)
SELECT * FROM slice_agentplan
```

## Limitations

- Single bundle at a time (no cross-bundle queries)
- SQLite functions only (no custom functions)
- Entire bundle is loaded on first query
- Tool params/results stored as JSON (use `json_extract()`)
- Extended thinking content is signature-encoded (not readable)

## Next Steps

- [Debugging](debugging.md): Broader debugging and observability patterns
- [Debug Bundle spec](../specs/DEBUG_BUNDLE.md): Bundle format details
- [Sessions](sessions.md): Understanding session state structure

Commit message:

Fix tool ordering to properly interleave native and custom tools
Changed tool_timeline view and query examples to order by timestamp
instead of seq, rowid. This ensures tools appear in actual execution
order rather than grouping all native tools before custom tools.

- tool_timeline view now uses ORDER BY timestamp, rowid
- Updated schema hints to use timestamp ordering for all_tools query
- Updated documentation in guides/query.md and specs/WINK_QUERY.md

The seq column is still useful for ordering within native tools only.

guides/query.md, after:

# Querying Debug Bundles

This guide covers `wink query`, a SQL-based tool for exploring debug bundles.
It's the primary way to analyze what happened during an agent execution.

*Canonical spec: [specs/WINK_QUERY.md](../specs/WINK_QUERY.md)*

## Prerequisites

Install the CLI extra:

```bash
pip install "weakincentives[wink]"
```

## Why SQL?

Debug bundles contain structured data—logs, tool calls, session state, errors.
SQL provides a familiar, powerful interface for filtering and aggregating this
data without writing custom scripts. The query command loads your bundle into
SQLite, giving you the full power of SQL for analysis.

## Basic Usage

```bash
# Discover what tables are available
wink query ./bundle.zip --schema

# Run a query (JSON output by default)
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM errors"

# Get formatted table output
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM errors" --table
```

Always start with `--schema` to see what tables exist and what columns they
have.

## Schema Discovery

The `--schema` flag outputs JSON describing all tables, views, and columns:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip --schema
```

Output includes:

- **tables**: Each table with name, description, row count, and column info
- **hints**: Ready-to-use JSON extraction patterns and common queries

The hints section is especially useful—it shows you exactly how to query nested
JSON data:

```json
{
  "hints": {
    "json_extraction": [
      "json_extract(context, '$.tool_name')",
      "json_extract(params, '$.command')",
      "json_extract(params, '$.path')"
    ],
    "common_queries": {
      "all_tools": "SELECT tool_name, source, success FROM tool_calls ORDER BY timestamp",
      "native_tools": "SELECT tool_name, params FROM tool_calls WHERE source = 'native' ORDER BY seq",
      "tool_timeline": "SELECT * FROM tool_timeline WHERE duration_ms > 1000",
      "error_context": "SELECT timestamp, message, context FROM logs WHERE level = 'ERROR'"
    }
  }
}
```

## Tables

### Core Tables

These tables are always present:

| Table | Source | What It Contains |
|-------|--------|------------------|
| `manifest` | `manifest.json` | Bundle ID, status, timestamps |
| `logs` | `logs/app.jsonl` | All log entries with event names and context |
| `tool_calls` | derived from logs | Unified tool invocations (native + custom) |
| `errors` | aggregated | All errors from logs, error.json, and failed tools |
| `session_slices` | `session/after.jsonl` | Session state items |
| `files` | `filesystem/` | Workspace files with paths and content |
| `config` | `config.json` | Configuration as flattened key-value pairs |
| `metrics` | `metrics.json` | Token usage and timing metrics |
| `run_context` | `run_context.json` | Request ID, session ID, trace ID |

### Optional Tables

| Table | Present When |
|-------|--------------|
| `prompt_overrides` | `prompt_overrides.json` exists |
| `eval` | Bundle is from EvalLoop |

### Dynamic Slice Tables

For each slice type in your session, a dedicated table is created:

```
slice_{normalized_type_name}
```

Example: A slice type `myapp.state:AgentPlan` becomes `slice_agentplan`. These
tables have columns inferred from the JSON structure, making it easy to query
typed session state.

## Views

Pre-built views for common analysis patterns:

| View | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `tool_timeline` | All tools ordered by execution sequence (native + custom) |
| `error_summary` | Errors with truncated tracebacks |

Use views directly in queries:

```sql
SELECT * FROM tool_timeline WHERE duration_ms > 1000
SELECT * FROM error_summary
```

## Common Queries

### Finding Errors

```sql
-- All errors with their source
SELECT source, error_type, message FROM errors

-- Error logs with timestamps
SELECT timestamp, message FROM logs WHERE level = 'ERROR'

-- Failed tool calls
SELECT tool_name, error_code, params FROM tool_calls WHERE success = 0
```

### Analyzing Tool Performance

```sql
-- Tool call counts and average duration
SELECT tool_name, COUNT(*) as calls, AVG(duration_ms) as avg_ms
FROM tool_calls
GROUP BY tool_name
ORDER BY calls DESC

-- Slowest tool calls
SELECT tool_name, duration_ms, params
FROM tool_calls
ORDER BY duration_ms DESC
LIMIT 10
```

### Inspecting Session State

```sql
-- What slice types exist
SELECT slice_type, COUNT(*) FROM session_slices GROUP BY slice_type

-- Query a specific slice table (created dynamically)
SELECT * FROM slice_agentplan
```

### Working with Logs

```sql
-- Find specific events
SELECT timestamp, event, context FROM logs WHERE event LIKE 'tool.%'

-- Extract nested JSON data
SELECT
    timestamp,
    json_extract(context, '$.tool_name') as tool,
    json_extract(context, '$.duration_ms') as duration
FROM logs
WHERE event = 'tool.execution.complete'
```

### Querying Tool Calls

The `tool_calls` table provides a unified view of all tool invocations:

- **Native tools** (`source = 'native'`): Claude Code's Bash, Read, Write, etc.
- **Custom tools** (`source = 'custom'`): MCP-bridged and custom tool handlers

```sql
-- All tools in execution order (interleaved by timestamp)
SELECT tool_name, source, success FROM tool_calls ORDER BY timestamp

-- Native tools only (Claude Code's built-in tools)
SELECT tool_name, params, success
FROM tool_calls
WHERE source = 'native'
ORDER BY seq

-- Custom tools only (MCP/custom handlers)
SELECT tool_name, duration_ms, result
FROM tool_calls
WHERE source = 'custom'
```

The `seq` column provides ordering within native tools; use `timestamp` for
proper interleaving of native and custom tools in the unified timeline.

### Token Usage

```sql
-- Get token metrics
SELECT key, value FROM metrics
WHERE key IN ('input_tokens', 'output_tokens', 'total_ms')
```

### Searching Files

```sql
-- Find files containing specific text
SELECT path FROM files WHERE content LIKE '%TODO%'

-- Find files by extension
SELECT path, LENGTH(content) as size FROM files WHERE path LIKE '%.py'
```

## Output Formats

### JSON (Default)

Returns results as a JSON array:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM manifest"
# [{"bundle_id": "abc123", "status": "success", ...}]
```

Good for piping to `jq` or processing programmatically.

### Table

Human-readable ASCII table:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT source, error_type, message FROM errors" --table
```

```
source | error_type | message
-------|------------|--------
log    | ValueError | Invalid config
tool   | TimeoutErr | Request timed out
```

By default, long values are truncated. Use `--no-truncate` for full content:

```bash
wink query ./bundle.zip "SELECT * FROM logs" --table --no-truncate
```

## Raw JSONL Export

For power users who prefer `jq` over SQL, export raw JSONL directly:

```bash
# Export logs (default)
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl

# Export session state
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl=session
```

Pipe to `jq` for filtering:

```bash
# Find specific events
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl | jq 'select(.event == "tool.execution.start")'

# Find session slices by type
wink query ./bundle.zip --export-jsonl=session | jq 'select(.__type__ | contains("Plan"))'
```

## Caching

The query command caches the SQLite database next to the bundle:

```
./bundle.zip           → input
./bundle.zip.sqlite    → cache
```

Cache is automatically invalidated when:

- Bundle modification time is newer than cache
- Schema version changes (after upgrades)

You don't need to manage the cache manually. Delete the `.sqlite` file if you
want to force a rebuild.

## Workflow Tips

**Start with schema**: Always run `--schema` first. The hints section shows you
exactly how to query the bundle.

**Use views first**: The pre-built views (`tool_timeline`, `error_summary`,
`native_tool_calls`) handle common patterns. Check these before writing custom
queries.

**Extract JSON early**: Log context and tool params are JSON. Extract the
fields you need in your SELECT:

```sql
SELECT
    timestamp,
    json_extract(context, '$.tool_name') as tool
FROM logs
```

**Filter then aggregate**: SQLite is fast, but filtering before aggregation
helps with large bundles:

```sql
SELECT tool_name, AVG(duration_ms)
FROM tool_calls
WHERE success = 1  -- Filter first
GROUP BY tool_name
```

## Debugging Scenarios

### "Why did the agent fail?"

```sql
-- Check the error summary
SELECT * FROM error_summary

-- Look at error logs with context
SELECT timestamp, message, context FROM logs WHERE level = 'ERROR'

-- Check if a tool failed
SELECT tool_name, error_code, params FROM tool_calls WHERE success = 0
```

### "Why was the agent slow?"

```sql
-- Find slow tool calls
SELECT * FROM tool_timeline WHERE duration_ms > 5000

-- Aggregate by tool
SELECT tool_name, COUNT(*), SUM(duration_ms) as total_ms
FROM tool_calls
GROUP BY tool_name
ORDER BY total_ms DESC
```

### "What did the agent actually do?"

```sql
-- Timeline of all tool calls (native + custom unified)
SELECT * FROM tool_timeline

-- Native tools only
SELECT tool_name, params FROM tool_calls WHERE source = 'native' ORDER BY seq

-- Custom tools only
SELECT tool_name, params, result FROM tool_calls WHERE source = 'custom'
```

### "What was the session state?"

```sql
-- List all slice types
SELECT DISTINCT slice_type FROM session_slices

-- Query specific slice (table name from schema)
SELECT * FROM slice_agentplan
```

## Limitations

- Single bundle at a time (no cross-bundle queries)
- SQLite functions only (no custom functions)
- Entire bundle is loaded on first query
- Tool params/results stored as JSON (use `json_extract()`)
- Extended thinking content is signature-encoded (not readable)

## Next Steps

- [Debugging](debugging.md): Broader debugging and observability patterns
- [Debug Bundle spec](../specs/DEBUG_BUNDLE.md): Bundle format details
- [Sessions](sessions.md): Understanding session state structure
