guides/skills-authoring.md, before:

# Skills Authoring

*Canonical spec: [specs/SKILLS.md](../specs/SKILLS.md)*

Skills are a lightweight way to extend Claude Code's capabilities. A skill is a
directory (or single file) containing instructions and optional resources that
the agent loads when relevant to a task.

This guide covers how to create skills and mount them with WINK.

## When to Use Skills

Skills are useful when you want to:

- **Add domain expertise**: Code review checklists, style guides, debugging
  procedures
- **Bundle instructions with resources**: Reference files, scripts, templates
- **Share capabilities**: Package reusable agent behaviors

Skills follow the [Agent Skills specification](https://agentskills.io), an open
format supported by Claude Code and other tools.

## Skill Structure

A skill is either a directory containing `SKILL.md` or a standalone markdown
file:

```
my-skill/
├── SKILL.md          # Required: metadata + instructions
├── scripts/          # Optional: executable scripts
├── references/       # Optional: reference files
├── examples/         # Optional: example files
└── assets/           # Optional: images, templates
```

Or as a single file:

```
my-skill.md           # Standalone skill (name derived from filename)
```

## The SKILL.md Format

Every skill needs a `SKILL.md` file with YAML frontmatter and markdown
instructions. The frontmatter is delimited by `---` lines:

```yaml
---
name: code-review
description: Perform thorough code reviews checking for security vulnerabilities, error handling, test coverage, and performance issues.
---
```

After the frontmatter, include markdown instructions:

```markdown
# Code Review Skill

You are a thorough code reviewer. When reviewing code:

## Review Checklist

- Check for security vulnerabilities (injection, XSS, auth bypass)
- Verify error handling covers edge cases
- Ensure tests cover new functionality

## Output Format

Structure your review as:

1. **Summary**: One-paragraph overview
2. **Issues**: Problems found (severity: high/medium/low)
3. **Suggestions**: Non-blocking improvements
```

### Required Fields

| Field | Constraints |
|-------|-------------|
| `name` | 1-64 chars, lowercase letters/numbers/hyphens only, no `--`, no leading/trailing `-` |
| `description` | 1-1024 chars, human-readable purpose |

### Optional Fields

| Field | Constraints | Description |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| `license` | String | License reference (e.g., "MIT", "Apache-2.0") |
| `compatibility` | Max 500 chars | Environment requirements |
| `metadata` | Dict[str, str] | Arbitrary key-value pairs |
| `allowed-tools` | String | Pre-approved tools (experimental) |

### Name Validation

Skill names must match the pattern `^[a-z0-9]+(-[a-z0-9]+)*$`:

```
valid:   code-review, python-style, my-tool-v2
invalid: Code-Review (uppercase), code--review (consecutive hyphens)
invalid: -code-review (leading hyphen), code_review (underscores)
```

For directory skills, the `name` field must match the directory name.

## Writing Effective Instructions

The markdown body of `SKILL.md` is injected into the agent's context when the
skill is activated. Write instructions as if you're briefing a colleague:

**Be specific about scope.** State what languages, frameworks, or contexts the
skill applies to.

**Use checklists for systematic tasks.** List items the agent should verify or
complete.

**Provide concrete examples.** Show good and bad patterns with brief
explanations. One example often beats three paragraphs.

**Keep instructions focused.** A 200-line skill that tries to cover everything
is less useful than three focused 50-line skills.

## Adding Resources

Skills can bundle additional files that the agent can reference:

```
testing-skill/
├── SKILL.md
├── scripts/
│   └── run-tests.sh
├── references/
│   └── test-patterns.md
├── examples/
│   └── sample-test.py
└── assets/
    └── workflow.png
```

Reference these in your instructions:

```
See `references/test-patterns.md` for the canonical test structure.
Use `scripts/run-tests.sh` to execute the test suite.
```

## Size Limits

Skills have size constraints to prevent bloated context:

- **Per-file limit**: 1 MiB
- **Per-skill limit**: 10 MiB total

Keep skills lean. If you're hitting limits, consider splitting into multiple
skills or moving large assets elsewhere.

## Mounting Skills with WINK

Skills are mounted via `IsolationConfig` when creating a Claude Agent SDK
adapter:

```python nocheck
from pathlib import Path
from weakincentives.adapters.claude_agent_sdk import (
    ClaudeAgentSDKAdapter,
    ClaudeAgentSDKClientConfig,
    IsolationConfig,
)
from weakincentives.skills import SkillConfig, SkillMount

adapter = ClaudeAgentSDKAdapter(
    client_config=ClaudeAgentSDKClientConfig(
        isolation=IsolationConfig(
            skills=SkillConfig(
                skills=(
                    SkillMount(Path("./skills/code-review")),
                    SkillMount(Path("./skills/python-style")),
                )
            ),
        ),
    ),
)
```

### Auto-Discovery

Mount all skills in a directory:

```python nocheck
from pathlib import Path
from weakincentives.skills import SkillConfig, SkillMount

SKILLS_ROOT = Path("./skills")

skill_mounts = tuple(
    SkillMount(source=skill_dir)
    for skill_dir in SKILLS_ROOT.iterdir()
    if skill_dir.is_dir() and (skill_dir / "SKILL.md").exists()
)

skills = SkillConfig(skills=skill_mounts)
```

### Conditional Skills

Enable or disable skills at runtime:

```python nocheck
SkillMount(
    source=Path("./skills/experimental"),
    enabled=config.include_experimental,
)
```

Disabled skills are not copied to the agent's skill directory.

### Name Override

Override the skill name when mounting:

```python nocheck
SkillMount(
    source=Path("./skills/my-cool-skill-v2"),
    name="my-cool-skill",  # Mount as "my-cool-skill" instead
)
```

### Disable Validation

Skip validation for trusted skills (not recommended for external sources):

```python nocheck
SkillConfig(skills=(...), validate_on_mount=False)
```

## Complete Example

Here's a complete example of a Python testing skill.

**Directory structure:**

```
skills/pytest-patterns/
├── SKILL.md
└── references/
    └── fixtures.md
```

**SKILL.md frontmatter:**

```yaml
---
name: pytest-patterns
description: Write effective pytest tests with proper fixtures, parametrization, and assertions.
---
```

**SKILL.md body** (markdown instructions for test patterns, fixture usage,
parametrization with `@pytest.mark.parametrize`, and assertion best practices).

**references/fixtures.md** contains common fixture patterns like database
sessions and temporary files that the skill instructions can reference.

**Mount the skill:**

```python nocheck
from pathlib import Path
from weakincentives.skills import SkillConfig, SkillMount

skills = SkillConfig(
    skills=(
        SkillMount(Path("./skills/pytest-patterns")),
    )
)
```

See `demo-skills/` in the repository for complete working examples:

- `code-review/` - Code review checklist
- `python-style/` - Python style guidelines
- `ascii-art/` - ASCII art generation

## Troubleshooting

### SkillNotFoundError

The source path doesn't exist:

```
SkillNotFoundError: Skill source not found: ./skills/missing
```

Check that the path is correct and the directory/file exists.

### SkillValidationError

The skill structure is invalid:

```
SkillValidationError: Missing required field 'name' in frontmatter
```

Ensure `SKILL.md` has valid YAML frontmatter with `name` and `description`.

### SkillMountError

Mounting failed due to name conflicts or I/O errors:

```
SkillMountError: Duplicate skill name: code-review
```

Each skill must have a unique name. Use the `name` parameter on `SkillMount` to
override if needed.

## What's Next

- [Claude Agent SDK](claude-agent-sdk.md): Full adapter configuration
- [Workspace Tools](workspace-tools.md): VFS and sandbox integration
- [Progressive Disclosure](progressive-disclosure.md): Manage context size

Commit message:

Clarify name override constraints for directory skills
Name overrides work directly for file skills but require disabling
validation for directory skills (since SKILL.md name must match source
directory to pass validation).

guides/skills-authoring.md, after:

# Skills Authoring

*Canonical spec: [specs/SKILLS.md](../specs/SKILLS.md)*

Skills are a lightweight way to extend Claude Code's capabilities. A skill is a
directory (or single file) containing instructions and optional resources that
the agent loads when relevant to a task.

This guide covers how to create skills and mount them with WINK.

## When to Use Skills

Skills are useful when you want to:

- **Add domain expertise**: Code review checklists, style guides, debugging
  procedures
- **Bundle instructions with resources**: Reference files, scripts, templates
- **Share capabilities**: Package reusable agent behaviors

Skills follow the [Agent Skills specification](https://agentskills.io), an open
format supported by Claude Code and other tools.

## Skill Structure

A skill is either a directory containing `SKILL.md` or a standalone markdown
file:

```
my-skill/
├── SKILL.md          # Required: metadata + instructions
├── scripts/          # Optional: executable scripts
├── references/       # Optional: reference files
├── examples/         # Optional: example files
└── assets/           # Optional: images, templates
```

Or as a single file:

```
my-skill.md           # Standalone skill (name derived from filename)
```

## The SKILL.md Format

Every skill needs a `SKILL.md` file with YAML frontmatter and markdown
instructions. The frontmatter is delimited by `---` lines:

```yaml
---
name: code-review
description: Perform thorough code reviews checking for security vulnerabilities, error handling, test coverage, and performance issues.
---
```

After the frontmatter, include markdown instructions:

```markdown
# Code Review Skill

You are a thorough code reviewer. When reviewing code:

## Review Checklist

- Check for security vulnerabilities (injection, XSS, auth bypass)
- Verify error handling covers edge cases
- Ensure tests cover new functionality

## Output Format

Structure your review as:

1. **Summary**: One-paragraph overview
2. **Issues**: Problems found (severity: high/medium/low)
3. **Suggestions**: Non-blocking improvements
```

### Required Fields

| Field | Constraints |
|-------|-------------|
| `name` | 1-64 chars, lowercase letters/numbers/hyphens only, no `--`, no leading/trailing `-` |
| `description` | 1-1024 chars, human-readable purpose |

### Optional Fields

| Field | Constraints | Description |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| `license` | String | License reference (e.g., "MIT", "Apache-2.0") |
| `compatibility` | Max 500 chars | Environment requirements |
| `metadata` | Dict[str, str] | Arbitrary key-value pairs |
| `allowed-tools` | String | Pre-approved tools (experimental) |

### Name Validation

Skill names must match the pattern `^[a-z0-9]+(-[a-z0-9]+)*$`:

```
valid:   code-review, python-style, my-tool-v2
invalid: Code-Review (uppercase), code--review (consecutive hyphens)
invalid: -code-review (leading hyphen), code_review (underscores)
```

For directory skills, the `name` field must match the directory name.

## Writing Effective Instructions

The markdown body of `SKILL.md` is injected into the agent's context when the
skill is activated. Write instructions as if you're briefing a colleague:

**Be specific about scope.** State what languages, frameworks, or contexts the
skill applies to.

**Use checklists for systematic tasks.** List items the agent should verify or
complete.

**Provide concrete examples.** Show good and bad patterns with brief
explanations. One example often beats three paragraphs.

**Keep instructions focused.** A 200-line skill that tries to cover everything
is less useful than three focused 50-line skills.

## Adding Resources

Skills can bundle additional files that the agent can reference:

```
testing-skill/
├── SKILL.md
├── scripts/
│   └── run-tests.sh
├── references/
│   └── test-patterns.md
├── examples/
│   └── sample-test.py
└── assets/
    └── workflow.png
```

Reference these in your instructions:

```
See `references/test-patterns.md` for the canonical test structure.
Use `scripts/run-tests.sh` to execute the test suite.
```

## Size Limits

Skills have size constraints to prevent bloated context:

- **Per-file limit**: 1 MiB
- **Per-skill limit**: 10 MiB total

Keep skills lean. If you're hitting limits, consider splitting into multiple
skills or moving large assets elsewhere.

## Mounting Skills with WINK

Skills are mounted via `IsolationConfig` when creating a Claude Agent SDK
adapter:

```python nocheck
from pathlib import Path
from weakincentives.adapters.claude_agent_sdk import (
    ClaudeAgentSDKAdapter,
    ClaudeAgentSDKClientConfig,
    IsolationConfig,
)
from weakincentives.skills import SkillConfig, SkillMount

adapter = ClaudeAgentSDKAdapter(
    client_config=ClaudeAgentSDKClientConfig(
        isolation=IsolationConfig(
            skills=SkillConfig(
                skills=(
                    SkillMount(Path("./skills/code-review")),
                    SkillMount(Path("./skills/python-style")),
                )
            ),
        ),
    ),
)
```

### Auto-Discovery

Mount all skills in a directory:

```python nocheck
from pathlib import Path
from weakincentives.skills import SkillConfig, SkillMount

SKILLS_ROOT = Path("./skills")

skill_mounts = tuple(
    SkillMount(source=skill_dir)
    for skill_dir in SKILLS_ROOT.iterdir()
    if skill_dir.is_dir() and (skill_dir / "SKILL.md").exists()
)

skills = SkillConfig(skills=skill_mounts)
```

### Conditional Skills

Enable or disable skills at runtime:

```python nocheck
SkillMount(
    source=Path("./skills/experimental"),
    enabled=config.include_experimental,
)
```

Disabled skills are not copied to the agent's skill directory.

### Name Override

Override the skill name when mounting. This is primarily useful for **file skills**
where there's no directory name constraint:

```python nocheck
SkillMount(
    source=Path("./skills/code-reviewer.md"),
    name="code-review",  # Mount as "code-review" instead of "code-reviewer"
)
```

For directory skills, the `name` field in SKILL.md must match the source
directory name to pass validation. If you need to mount a directory skill under
a different name, you must disable validation:

```python nocheck
# Directory skill with name override requires disabling validation
SkillMount(
    source=Path("./skills/my-cool-skill-v2"),
    name="my-cool-skill",
)
# ...
SkillConfig(skills=(...), validate_on_mount=False)
```

This is not recommended for external or untrusted skills.

### Disable Validation

Skip validation for trusted skills:

```python nocheck
SkillConfig(skills=(...), validate_on_mount=False)
```

Use this when you control the skill source and need flexibility (e.g., name
overrides for directory skills). Avoid for external sources where validation
catches malformed or potentially malicious skills.

## Complete Example

Here's a complete example of a Python testing skill.

**Directory structure:**

```
skills/pytest-patterns/
├── SKILL.md
└── references/
    └── fixtures.md
```

**SKILL.md frontmatter:**

```yaml
---
name: pytest-patterns
description: Write effective pytest tests with proper fixtures, parametrization, and assertions.
---
```

**SKILL.md body** (markdown instructions for test patterns, fixture usage,
parametrization with `@pytest.mark.parametrize`, and assertion best practices).

**references/fixtures.md** contains common fixture patterns like database
sessions and temporary files that the skill instructions can reference.

**Mount the skill:**

```python nocheck
from pathlib import Path
from weakincentives.skills import SkillConfig, SkillMount

skills = SkillConfig(
    skills=(
        SkillMount(Path("./skills/pytest-patterns")),
    )
)
```

See `demo-skills/` in the repository for complete working examples:

- `code-review/` - Code review checklist
- `python-style/` - Python style guidelines
- `ascii-art/` - ASCII art generation

## Troubleshooting

### SkillNotFoundError

The source path doesn't exist:

```
SkillNotFoundError: Skill source not found: ./skills/missing
```

Check that the path is correct and the directory/file exists.

### SkillValidationError

The skill structure is invalid:

```
SkillValidationError: Missing required field 'name' in frontmatter
```

Ensure `SKILL.md` has valid YAML frontmatter with `name` and `description`.

### SkillMountError

Mounting failed due to name conflicts or I/O errors:

```
SkillMountError: Duplicate skill name: code-review
```

Each skill must have a unique name. Use the `name` parameter on `SkillMount` to
override if needed.

## What's Next

- [Claude Agent SDK](claude-agent-sdk.md): Full adapter configuration
- [Workspace Tools](workspace-tools.md): VFS and sandbox integration
- [Progressive Disclosure](progressive-disclosure.md): Manage context size
