specs/DEADLINES.md, before:

# Deadlines Specification

## Goal

Allow orchestration hosts to enforce a wall-clock deadline for an entire
`evaluate()` run, ensuring tool handlers and delegated subagents stop before the
window closes. The deadline is provided by the caller and applies uniformly to
all nested work spawned during that evaluation.

## API Changes

- Extend `ProviderAdapter.evaluate` with a new keyword-only argument:

  ```python
  from datetime import datetime

  def evaluate(
      self,
      prompt: Prompt[OutputT],
      *params: SupportsDataclass,
      parse_output: bool = True,
      *,
      bus: EventBus,
      session: SessionProtocol,
      deadline: datetime | None = None,
  ) -> PromptResponse[OutputT]:
      ...
  ```

  - `deadline` MUST be timezone-aware (`tzinfo` set) and represent a timestamp in
    the future relative to `datetime.now(datetime.UTC)` when the call starts.
  - Callers may omit `deadline`; adapters treat `None` as "no deadline" to remain
    backwards compatible with existing integrations.
  - Adapters validate the argument eagerly and raise `PromptEvaluationError`
    with `phase="preflight"` if the timestamp is missing `tzinfo`, lies in the
    past, or falls within the current second.

- Mirror the new keyword in every public adapter (`openai`, `litellm`, etc.) and
  thread it through helper layers such as prompt runners, orchestration
  utilities, and the `ToolContext` dataclass so handlers can inspect the value.

- Introduce a `DeadlineExceededError(RuntimeError)` in `weakincentives.tools.errors`.
  Tools raise it when they cannot finish before the cutoff.

- Extend `ToolResult` with an optional `deadline_exceeded: bool = False` field so
  adapters can surface fatal deadline breaches from integrations that cannot
  throw exceptions directly.

## Deadline Propagation

1. **Rendered Prompt Metadata** – After validation the orchestrator stores the
   deadline on the rendered prompt instance (`RenderedPrompt.deadline: datetime | None`). All child prompts created during the run inherit this value unless a
   stricter deadline is provided explicitly.
1. **Tool Context** – Extend `ToolContext` with a `deadline: datetime | None`
   attribute. The orchestrator populates it before every handler invocation so
   tools can self-limit work or spawn nested prompts with the same deadline.

## Enforcement Rules

- **Before Provider Calls** – Adapters compare `datetime.now(datetime.UTC)` to
  the deadline immediately before sending a request. If the deadline has passed
  they skip the provider call and raise `PromptEvaluationError` with
  `phase="deadline"`.
- **Tool Execution** – Add a `DeadlineExceededError` exception to
  `weakincentives.tools.errors`. Tool handlers MUST raise this error if the
  remaining time is insufficient to complete work safely. The runtime converts
  it into a `PromptEvaluationError` with `phase="deadline"`, aborting the entire
  evaluation loop immediately. When the deadline expires before invocation, the
  runtime raises the same `PromptEvaluationError` without calling the handler.
- **Tool Execution (Fallback)** – If a tool integration cannot raise
  `DeadlineExceededError`, extend `ToolResult` with a boolean
  `deadline_exceeded` flag. Adapters treat a result with
  `deadline_exceeded=True` as fatal, re-raising `PromptEvaluationError` with
  `phase="deadline"` so downstream components observe a consistent failure
  signal.
- **Subagents** – Delegation helpers reuse the deadline supplied by the parent
  context. Child prompts run with the earlier of the parent deadline and any
  explicit child override. When a delegated prompt overruns the deadline the
  helper raises `PromptEvaluationError` with `phase="deadline"` so the parent
  evaluation terminates immediately.
- **Polling & Retries** – Any retry loops (for streaming responses or provider
  backoffs) must re-check the deadline before each iteration to avoid overshooting
  the wall-clock budget.

## Observability

- Include the deadline timestamp in the `provider_payload` envelope when raising
  deadline errors so hosts can log the cutoff time.
- Emit structured log lines or events summarizing time remaining when a prompt
  finishes, making deadline usage visible even on successful runs.

## Testing Strategy

- Unit tests cover validation failures (`tzinfo` missing, past deadlines, etc.).
- Adapter integration tests simulate deadlines a few seconds in the future and
  assert that tool handlers receive the value via `ToolContext`.
- Subagent tests create parent/child prompts with conflicting deadlines and
  verify that the tighter deadline prevails.
- Regression tests confirm that omitting `deadline` preserves current behavior.

Commit message:

Require DeadlineExceededError for deadline breaches

specs/DEADLINES.md, after:

# Deadlines Specification

## Goal

Allow orchestration hosts to enforce a wall-clock deadline for an entire
`evaluate()` run, ensuring tool handlers and delegated subagents stop before the
window closes. The deadline is provided by the caller and applies uniformly to
all nested work spawned during that evaluation.

## API Changes

- Extend `ProviderAdapter.evaluate` with a new keyword-only argument:

  ```python
  from datetime import datetime

  def evaluate(
      self,
      prompt: Prompt[OutputT],
      *params: SupportsDataclass,
      parse_output: bool = True,
      *,
      bus: EventBus,
      session: SessionProtocol,
      deadline: datetime | None = None,
  ) -> PromptResponse[OutputT]:
      ...
  ```

  - `deadline` MUST be timezone-aware (`tzinfo` set) and represent a timestamp in
    the future relative to `datetime.now(datetime.UTC)` when the call starts.
  - Callers may omit `deadline`; adapters treat `None` as "no deadline" to remain
    backwards compatible with existing integrations.
  - Adapters validate the argument eagerly and raise `PromptEvaluationError`
    with `phase="preflight"` if the timestamp is missing `tzinfo`, lies in the
    past, or falls within the current second.

- Mirror the new keyword in every public adapter (`openai`, `litellm`, etc.) and
  thread it through helper layers such as prompt runners, orchestration
  utilities, and the `ToolContext` dataclass so handlers can inspect the value.

- Introduce a `DeadlineExceededError(RuntimeError)` in `weakincentives.tools.errors`.
  Tools raise it when they cannot finish before the cutoff.

## Deadline Propagation

1. **Rendered Prompt Metadata** – After validation the orchestrator stores the
   deadline on the rendered prompt instance (`RenderedPrompt.deadline: datetime | None`). All child prompts created during the run inherit this value unless a
   stricter deadline is provided explicitly.
1. **Tool Context** – Extend `ToolContext` with a `deadline: datetime | None`
   attribute. The orchestrator populates it before every handler invocation so
   tools can self-limit work or spawn nested prompts with the same deadline.

## Enforcement Rules

- **Before Provider Calls** – Adapters compare `datetime.now(datetime.UTC)` to
  the deadline immediately before sending a request. If the deadline has passed
  they skip the provider call and raise `PromptEvaluationError` with
  `phase="deadline"`.
- **Tool Execution** – Add a `DeadlineExceededError` exception to
  `weakincentives.tools.errors`. Tool handlers MUST raise this error if the
  remaining time is insufficient to complete work safely. The runtime converts
  it into a `PromptEvaluationError` with `phase="deadline"`, aborting the entire
  evaluation loop immediately. When the deadline expires before invocation, the
  runtime raises the same `PromptEvaluationError` without calling the handler.
- **Tool Execution Contract** – All components treat `DeadlineExceededError`
  as the sole signal that the deadline has been exceeded. Handlers that cannot
  complete in time MUST raise it directly so the runtime can translate it into
  a `PromptEvaluationError` with `phase="deadline"` and halt the evaluation
  loop immediately.
- **Subagents** – Delegation helpers reuse the deadline supplied by the parent
  context. Child prompts run with the earlier of the parent deadline and any
  explicit child override. When a delegated prompt overruns the deadline the
  helper lets `DeadlineExceededError` propagate so the parent runtime converts
  it into `PromptEvaluationError` with `phase="deadline"` and terminates the
  evaluation immediately.
- **Polling & Retries** – Any retry loops (for streaming responses or provider
  backoffs) must re-check the deadline before each iteration to avoid overshooting
  the wall-clock budget.

## Observability

- Include the deadline timestamp in the `provider_payload` envelope when raising
  deadline errors so hosts can log the cutoff time.
- Emit structured log lines or events summarizing time remaining when a prompt
  finishes, making deadline usage visible even on successful runs.

## Testing Strategy

- Unit tests cover validation failures (`tzinfo` missing, past deadlines, etc.).
- Adapter integration tests simulate deadlines a few seconds in the future and
  assert that tool handlers receive the value via `ToolContext`.
- Subagent tests create parent/child prompts with conflicting deadlines and
  verify that the tighter deadline prevails.
- Regression tests confirm that omitting `deadline` preserves current behavior.
