specs/EVALS.md, before:

# Evals Specification

## Purpose

Minimal evaluation framework built on MainLoop. MainLoop handles orchestration;
this spec adds datasets and scoring.

## Guiding Principles

- **MainLoop is the runner** - No parallel orchestration; reuse existing infra
- **Evaluators are functions** - Pure `(output, expected) -> Score`
- **Datasets are tuples** - Immutable, typed, serializable

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐     ┌──────────┐     ┌───────────┐     ┌────────────┐
│   Dataset   │────▶│ run_eval │────▶│ MainLoop  │────▶│  Adapter   │
│  (samples)  │     │          │     │ .execute()│     │            │
└─────────────┘     └────┬─────┘     └───────────┘     └────────────┘
                         │
                         ▼
                   ┌───────────┐     ┌────────────┐
                   │ Evaluator │────▶│ EvalReport │
                   │ (scoring) │     │ (metrics)  │
                   └───────────┘     └────────────┘
```

The eval framework wraps MainLoop: for each sample, it calls `loop.execute()`,
then passes the output to an evaluator for scoring. Results aggregate into a
report.

## Core Types

### Sample

A single evaluation case pairing an input with its expected output:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class Sample[InputT, ExpectedT]:
    """Single evaluation input."""
    id: str
    input: InputT
    expected: ExpectedT
```

The generic parameters allow typed datasets—`Sample[MathProblem, int]` for math
evals, `Sample[str, str]` for QA, etc.

### Dataset

A dataset is a tuple of samples. Using a tuple (not list) ensures immutability:

```python
Dataset = tuple[Sample[InputT, ExpectedT], ...]
```

**Loading from JSONL:**

```python
def _coerce[T](value: object, target: type[T]) -> T:
    """Coerce JSON value to target type.

    Primitives (str, int, float, bool) pass through directly.
    Mappings are parsed as dataclasses via serde.parse.
    """
    if target in (str, int, float, bool):
        if not isinstance(value, target):
            raise TypeError(f"expected {target.__name__}, got {type(value).__name__}")
        return value  # type: ignore[return-value]
    if isinstance(value, Mapping):
        return parse(target, value)
    raise TypeError(f"cannot coerce {type(value).__name__} to {target.__name__}")


def load_jsonl[I, E](
    path: Path,
    input_type: type[I],
    expected_type: type[E],
) -> tuple[Sample[I, E], ...]:
    """Load samples from JSONL file.

    Each line must be a JSON object with "id", "input", and "expected" keys.
    Primitives (str, int, float, bool) are used directly; mappings are
    deserialized into dataclasses via serde.parse.
    """
    samples: list[Sample[I, E]] = []
    with path.open() as f:
        for line in f:
            obj = json.loads(line)
            samples.append(Sample(
                id=obj["id"],
                input=_coerce(obj["input"], input_type),
                expected=_coerce(obj["expected"], expected_type),
            ))
    return tuple(samples)
```

**JSONL format:**

```jsonl
{"id": "1", "input": "What is 2+2?", "expected": "4"}
{"id": "2", "input": "Capital of France?", "expected": "Paris"}
```

For complex types, input/expected can be nested objects that deserialize into
dataclasses.

### Score

The result of evaluating a single output:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class Score:
    """Result of scoring one output."""
    value: float      # 0.0 to 1.0, normalized
    passed: bool      # Binary pass/fail
    reason: str = ""  # Explanation (useful for LLM judges)
```

The `value` field enables ranking and aggregation; `passed` provides a binary
threshold for pass rates.

### Evaluator

An evaluator is any callable matching this signature:

```python
Evaluator = Callable[[OutputT, ExpectedT], Score]
```

Evaluators are pure functions—no side effects, no state. This makes them easy
to test, compose, and reason about.

## Built-in Evaluators

### exact_match

Strict equality check:

```python
def exact_match[T](output: T, expected: T) -> Score:
    """Exact equality check."""
    passed = output == expected
    return Score(value=1.0 if passed else 0.0, passed=passed)
```

### contains

Substring presence check:

```python
def contains(output: str, expected: str) -> Score:
    """Check if expected appears in output."""
    passed = expected in output
    return Score(value=1.0 if passed else 0.0, passed=passed)
```

### Combinators

Combine evaluators for multi-criteria scoring:

```python
def all_of(*evaluators: Evaluator[O, E]) -> Evaluator[O, E]:
    """All evaluators must pass. Score is the mean."""
    def evaluate(output: O, expected: E) -> Score:
        scores = [e(output, expected) for e in evaluators]
        passed = all(s.passed for s in scores)
        value = sum(s.value for s in scores) / len(scores)
        reasons = [s.reason for s in scores if s.reason]
        return Score(value=value, passed=passed, reason="; ".join(reasons))
    return evaluate


def any_of(*evaluators: Evaluator[O, E]) -> Evaluator[O, E]:
    """At least one evaluator must pass. Score is the max."""
    def evaluate(output: O, expected: E) -> Score:
        scores = [e(output, expected) for e in evaluators]
        passed = any(s.passed for s in scores)
        value = max(s.value for s in scores)
        reasons = [s.reason for s in scores if s.reason]
        return Score(value=value, passed=passed, reason="; ".join(reasons))
    return evaluate
```

### Custom Evaluators

Write domain-specific evaluators as simple functions:

```python
def within_tolerance(tolerance: float) -> Evaluator[float, float]:
    """Check if output is within tolerance of expected."""
    def evaluate(output: float, expected: float) -> Score:
        diff = abs(output - expected)
        passed = diff <= tolerance
        value = max(0.0, 1.0 - diff / tolerance) if tolerance > 0 else float(passed)
        return Score(value=value, passed=passed, reason=f"diff={diff:.4f}")
    return evaluate


def json_subset(output: dict, expected: dict) -> Score:
    """Check if expected keys/values are present in output."""
    for key, value in expected.items():
        if key not in output or output[key] != value:
            return Score(value=0.0, passed=False, reason=f"missing or wrong: {key}")
    return Score(value=1.0, passed=True)
```

## LLM-as-Judge

For subjective criteria, use an LLM to score outputs. Rather than asking for
numerical scores (which LLMs calibrate poorly), the judge selects from a fixed
set of rating labels that map to values.

### Rating Scale

```python
Rating = Literal["excellent", "good", "fair", "poor", "wrong"]

RATING_VALUES: dict[Rating, float] = {
    "excellent": 1.0,   # Fully meets criterion
    "good": 0.75,       # Meets criterion with minor issues
    "fair": 0.5,        # Partially meets criterion
    "poor": 0.25,       # Mostly fails criterion
    "wrong": 0.0,       # Completely fails criterion
}

PASSING_RATINGS: frozenset[Rating] = frozenset({"excellent", "good"})
```

### Judge Output

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class JudgeOutput:
    """Structured output from judge prompt."""
    rating: Rating  # Categorical label
    reason: str     # Brief explanation


JUDGE_TEMPLATE = PromptTemplate[JudgeOutput](
    ns="wink.evals",
    key="llm-judge",
    name="llm_judge",
    sections=[
        MarkdownSection(
            title="Evaluation Task",
            template="""You are an evaluation judge. Rate the output on the given criterion.

## Criterion
$criterion

## Output to Evaluate
$output

## Reference Answer
$expected

## Rating Scale
- **excellent**: Fully meets the criterion
- **good**: Meets the criterion with minor issues
- **fair**: Partially meets the criterion
- **poor**: Mostly fails the criterion
- **wrong**: Completely fails the criterion

Select one rating and explain your reasoning briefly.""",
            key="task",
        ),
    ],
)
```

### llm_judge Factory

```python
def llm_judge(
    adapter: ProviderAdapter[JudgeOutput],
    criterion: str,
    *,
    bus: EventBus,
) -> Evaluator[str, str]:
    """Create evaluator that uses LLM to judge output.

    Args:
        adapter: Provider adapter configured for JudgeOutput
        criterion: What to evaluate (e.g., "factual accuracy", "clarity")
        bus: EventBus for creating judge sessions

    Returns:
        Evaluator function that scores string outputs
    """
    def evaluate(output: str, expected: str) -> Score:
        prompt = Prompt(JUDGE_TEMPLATE).bind(
            criterion=criterion,
            output=output,
            expected=expected,
        )
        session = Session(bus=bus, tags={"judge_criterion": criterion})
        response = adapter.evaluate(prompt, session=session)
        rating = response.output.rating
        return Score(
            value=RATING_VALUES[rating],
            passed=rating in PASSING_RATINGS,
            reason=response.output.reason,
        )
    return evaluate
```

**Usage:**

```python
# Use a smaller/cheaper model for judging
judge_adapter = OpenAIAdapter[JudgeOutput](model="gpt-4o-mini")
judge_bus = InProcessEventBus()

evaluator = all_of(
    contains,  # Must contain expected answer
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "Response is helpful and well-formatted", bus=judge_bus),
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "No hallucinated information", bus=judge_bus),
)
```

## Running Evals

### EvalResult

Result for a single sample:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class EvalResult:
    """Result for one sample."""
    sample_id: str
    score: Score
    latency_ms: int
    error: str | None = None

    @property
    def success(self) -> bool:
        """True if no error occurred."""
        return self.error is None
```

### EvalReport

Aggregate results with computed metrics:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class EvalReport:
    """Aggregate evaluation results."""
    results: tuple[EvalResult, ...]

    @property
    def total(self) -> int:
        """Total number of samples."""
        return len(self.results)

    @property
    def successful(self) -> int:
        """Samples that completed without error."""
        return sum(1 for r in self.results if r.success)

    @property
    def pass_rate(self) -> float:
        """Fraction of successful samples that passed."""
        successful = [r for r in self.results if r.success]
        if not successful:
            return 0.0
        return sum(1 for r in successful if r.score.passed) / len(successful)

    @property
    def mean_score(self) -> float:
        """Mean score across successful samples."""
        successful = [r for r in self.results if r.success]
        if not successful:
            return 0.0
        return sum(r.score.value for r in successful) / len(successful)

    @property
    def mean_latency_ms(self) -> float:
        """Mean latency per sample."""
        if not self.results:
            return 0.0
        return sum(r.latency_ms for r in self.results) / len(self.results)

    def failed_samples(self) -> tuple[EvalResult, ...]:
        """Samples that did not pass."""
        return tuple(r for r in self.results if r.success and not r.score.passed)
```

### run_eval

The core function that ties everything together:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class SampleEvaluated:
    """Emitted after each sample is evaluated."""
    sample_id: str
    result: EvalResult


def run_eval[I, O, E](
    loop: MainLoop[I, O],
    dataset: tuple[Sample[I, E], ...],
    evaluator: Evaluator[O, E],
    *,
    bus: EventBus | None = None,
) -> EvalReport:
    """Run evaluation using MainLoop.

    For each sample in the dataset:
    1. Execute the sample input through MainLoop
    2. Score the output using the evaluator
    3. Record timing
    4. Publish SampleEvaluated event (if bus provided)

    Args:
        loop: MainLoop instance to run samples through
        dataset: Tuple of samples to evaluate
        evaluator: Scoring function for outputs
        bus: Optional EventBus for progress notifications

    Returns:
        EvalReport with all results and aggregate metrics
    """
    results: list[EvalResult] = []

    for sample in dataset:
        start = time.monotonic()
        try:
            response, _ = loop.execute(sample.input)
            latency_ms = int((time.monotonic() - start) * 1000)
            score = evaluator(response.output, sample.expected)
            result = EvalResult(
                sample_id=sample.id,
                score=score,
                latency_ms=latency_ms,
            )
        except Exception as e:
            latency_ms = int((time.monotonic() - start) * 1000)
            result = EvalResult(
                sample_id=sample.id,
                score=Score(value=0.0, passed=False, reason=str(e)),
                latency_ms=latency_ms,
                error=str(e),
            )

        results.append(result)
        if bus is not None:
            bus.publish(SampleEvaluated(sample_id=sample.id, result=result))

    return EvalReport(results=tuple(results))
```

## Usage Examples

### Basic Evaluation

```python
from weakincentives import MainLoop, PromptTemplate, Prompt, Session
from weakincentives.adapters.openai import OpenAIAdapter
from weakincentives.runtime import InProcessEventBus
from weakincentives.evals import Sample, run_eval, exact_match, load_jsonl

# Define the loop under test
class QALoop(MainLoop[str, str]):
    def __init__(self, adapter, bus):
        super().__init__(adapter=adapter, bus=bus)
        self._template = PromptTemplate[str](
            ns="qa",
            key="answer",
            name="qa",
            sections=[
                MarkdownSection(
                    title="Question",
                    template="Answer concisely: $question",
                    key="q",
                ),
            ],
        )

    def create_prompt(self, question: str) -> Prompt[str]:
        return Prompt(self._template).bind(question=question)

    def create_session(self) -> Session:
        return Session(bus=self._bus)


# Load dataset
dataset = load_jsonl(Path("tests/fixtures/qa.jsonl"), str, str)

# Run evaluation
adapter = OpenAIAdapter(model="gpt-4o")
loop = QALoop(adapter=adapter, bus=InProcessEventBus())
report = run_eval(loop, dataset, exact_match)

# Inspect results
print(f"Pass rate: {report.pass_rate:.1%}")
print(f"Mean score: {report.mean_score:.2f}")
print(f"Mean latency: {report.mean_latency_ms:.0f}ms")

# Review failures
for result in report.failed_samples():
    print(f"Failed: {result.sample_id} - {result.score.reason}")
```

### Multi-Criteria Evaluation

```python
from weakincentives.evals import all_of, llm_judge

# Create judge adapter and bus
judge_adapter = OpenAIAdapter[JudgeOutput](model="gpt-4o-mini")
judge_bus = InProcessEventBus()

# Compose multiple criteria
evaluator = all_of(
    contains,  # Must contain expected substring
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "Factually accurate", bus=judge_bus),
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "Well-structured response", bus=judge_bus),
)

report = run_eval(loop, dataset, evaluator)
```

### Programmatic Dataset

```python
# Build dataset in code
dataset = tuple(
    Sample(
        id=str(i),
        input=f"What is {a} + {b}?",
        expected=str(a + b),
    )
    for i, (a, b) in enumerate([(1, 1), (2, 3), (10, 20)])
)

report = run_eval(loop, dataset, contains)
```

## Observability

Pass an `EventBus` to `run_eval` to receive progress notifications:

```python
from weakincentives.evals import SampleEvaluated

def on_sample(event: SampleEvaluated) -> None:
    status = "PASS" if event.result.score.passed else "FAIL"
    print(f"[{status}] {event.sample_id}: {event.result.score.value:.2f}")

bus = InProcessEventBus()
bus.subscribe(SampleEvaluated, on_sample)

loop = QALoop(adapter=adapter, bus=InProcessEventBus())
report = run_eval(loop, dataset, evaluator, bus=bus)
```

With LangSmith enabled, MainLoop executions are automatically traced.

## Testing Evaluators

Evaluators are pure functions—test them directly:

```python
def test_exact_match_pass():
    score = exact_match("hello", "hello")
    assert score.passed is True
    assert score.value == 1.0


def test_exact_match_fail():
    score = exact_match("hello", "world")
    assert score.passed is False
    assert score.value == 0.0


def test_contains_pass():
    score = contains("The answer is 42.", "42")
    assert score.passed is True


def test_all_of_requires_all():
    evaluator = all_of(exact_match, contains)
    score = evaluator("hello", "hello")
    assert score.passed is True

    score = evaluator("hello world", "hello")
    assert score.passed is False  # exact_match fails


def test_any_of_requires_one():
    evaluator = any_of(exact_match, contains)
    score = evaluator("hello world", "hello")
    assert score.passed is True  # contains passes
```

## Limitations

- **Sequential execution** - MainLoop is synchronous; samples run one at a time
- **No caching** - Repeated samples re-execute; add caching at adapter level
- **No checkpoints** - Cannot resume interrupted runs
- **Single loop** - Cannot compare multiple loops in one `run_eval` call

Commit message:

Rename EventBus to Dispatcher with dispatch() returning DispatchResult
Refactor the event system to use clearer naming that better reflects
the synchronous, in-process dispatch semantics:

- EventBus → Dispatcher
- InProcessEventBus → InProcessDispatcher
- PublishResult → DispatchResult
- publish() → dispatch()
- Session.broadcast() → Session.dispatch() (now returns DispatchResult)
- ControlBus → ControlDispatcher
- TelemetryBus → TelemetryDispatcher
- Session.event_bus → Session.dispatcher

The new naming aligns with Redux-style dispatch patterns and removes the
"fire-and-forget" connotation of traditional event buses. The dispatch()
method returns DispatchResult for delivery tracking and error handling.

specs/EVALS.md, after:

# Evals Specification

## Purpose

Minimal evaluation framework built on MainLoop. MainLoop handles orchestration;
this spec adds datasets and scoring.

## Guiding Principles

- **MainLoop is the runner** - No parallel orchestration; reuse existing infra
- **Evaluators are functions** - Pure `(output, expected) -> Score`
- **Datasets are tuples** - Immutable, typed, serializable

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐     ┌──────────┐     ┌───────────┐     ┌────────────┐
│   Dataset   │────▶│ run_eval │────▶│ MainLoop  │────▶│  Adapter   │
│  (samples)  │     │          │     │ .execute()│     │            │
└─────────────┘     └────┬─────┘     └───────────┘     └────────────┘
                         │
                         ▼
                   ┌───────────┐     ┌────────────┐
                   │ Evaluator │────▶│ EvalReport │
                   │ (scoring) │     │ (metrics)  │
                   └───────────┘     └────────────┘
```

The eval framework wraps MainLoop: for each sample, it calls `loop.execute()`,
then passes the output to an evaluator for scoring. Results aggregate into a
report.

## Core Types

### Sample

A single evaluation case pairing an input with its expected output:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class Sample[InputT, ExpectedT]:
    """Single evaluation input."""
    id: str
    input: InputT
    expected: ExpectedT
```

The generic parameters allow typed datasets—`Sample[MathProblem, int]` for math
evals, `Sample[str, str]` for QA, etc.

### Dataset

A dataset is a tuple of samples. Using a tuple (not list) ensures immutability:

```python
Dataset = tuple[Sample[InputT, ExpectedT], ...]
```

**Loading from JSONL:**

```python
def _coerce[T](value: object, target: type[T]) -> T:
    """Coerce JSON value to target type.

    Primitives (str, int, float, bool) pass through directly.
    Mappings are parsed as dataclasses via serde.parse.
    """
    if target in (str, int, float, bool):
        if not isinstance(value, target):
            raise TypeError(f"expected {target.__name__}, got {type(value).__name__}")
        return value  # type: ignore[return-value]
    if isinstance(value, Mapping):
        return parse(target, value)
    raise TypeError(f"cannot coerce {type(value).__name__} to {target.__name__}")


def load_jsonl[I, E](
    path: Path,
    input_type: type[I],
    expected_type: type[E],
) -> tuple[Sample[I, E], ...]:
    """Load samples from JSONL file.

    Each line must be a JSON object with "id", "input", and "expected" keys.
    Primitives (str, int, float, bool) are used directly; mappings are
    deserialized into dataclasses via serde.parse.
    """
    samples: list[Sample[I, E]] = []
    with path.open() as f:
        for line in f:
            obj = json.loads(line)
            samples.append(Sample(
                id=obj["id"],
                input=_coerce(obj["input"], input_type),
                expected=_coerce(obj["expected"], expected_type),
            ))
    return tuple(samples)
```

**JSONL format:**

```jsonl
{"id": "1", "input": "What is 2+2?", "expected": "4"}
{"id": "2", "input": "Capital of France?", "expected": "Paris"}
```

For complex types, input/expected can be nested objects that deserialize into
dataclasses.

### Score

The result of evaluating a single output:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class Score:
    """Result of scoring one output."""
    value: float      # 0.0 to 1.0, normalized
    passed: bool      # Binary pass/fail
    reason: str = ""  # Explanation (useful for LLM judges)
```

The `value` field enables ranking and aggregation; `passed` provides a binary
threshold for pass rates.

### Evaluator

An evaluator is any callable matching this signature:

```python
Evaluator = Callable[[OutputT, ExpectedT], Score]
```

Evaluators are pure functions—no side effects, no state. This makes them easy
to test, compose, and reason about.

## Built-in Evaluators

### exact_match

Strict equality check:

```python
def exact_match[T](output: T, expected: T) -> Score:
    """Exact equality check."""
    passed = output == expected
    return Score(value=1.0 if passed else 0.0, passed=passed)
```

### contains

Substring presence check:

```python
def contains(output: str, expected: str) -> Score:
    """Check if expected appears in output."""
    passed = expected in output
    return Score(value=1.0 if passed else 0.0, passed=passed)
```

### Combinators

Combine evaluators for multi-criteria scoring:

```python
def all_of(*evaluators: Evaluator[O, E]) -> Evaluator[O, E]:
    """All evaluators must pass. Score is the mean."""
    def evaluate(output: O, expected: E) -> Score:
        scores = [e(output, expected) for e in evaluators]
        passed = all(s.passed for s in scores)
        value = sum(s.value for s in scores) / len(scores)
        reasons = [s.reason for s in scores if s.reason]
        return Score(value=value, passed=passed, reason="; ".join(reasons))
    return evaluate


def any_of(*evaluators: Evaluator[O, E]) -> Evaluator[O, E]:
    """At least one evaluator must pass. Score is the max."""
    def evaluate(output: O, expected: E) -> Score:
        scores = [e(output, expected) for e in evaluators]
        passed = any(s.passed for s in scores)
        value = max(s.value for s in scores)
        reasons = [s.reason for s in scores if s.reason]
        return Score(value=value, passed=passed, reason="; ".join(reasons))
    return evaluate
```

### Custom Evaluators

Write domain-specific evaluators as simple functions:

```python
def within_tolerance(tolerance: float) -> Evaluator[float, float]:
    """Check if output is within tolerance of expected."""
    def evaluate(output: float, expected: float) -> Score:
        diff = abs(output - expected)
        passed = diff <= tolerance
        value = max(0.0, 1.0 - diff / tolerance) if tolerance > 0 else float(passed)
        return Score(value=value, passed=passed, reason=f"diff={diff:.4f}")
    return evaluate


def json_subset(output: dict, expected: dict) -> Score:
    """Check if expected keys/values are present in output."""
    for key, value in expected.items():
        if key not in output or output[key] != value:
            return Score(value=0.0, passed=False, reason=f"missing or wrong: {key}")
    return Score(value=1.0, passed=True)
```

## LLM-as-Judge

For subjective criteria, use an LLM to score outputs. Rather than asking for
numerical scores (which LLMs calibrate poorly), the judge selects from a fixed
set of rating labels that map to values.

### Rating Scale

```python
Rating = Literal["excellent", "good", "fair", "poor", "wrong"]

RATING_VALUES: dict[Rating, float] = {
    "excellent": 1.0,   # Fully meets criterion
    "good": 0.75,       # Meets criterion with minor issues
    "fair": 0.5,        # Partially meets criterion
    "poor": 0.25,       # Mostly fails criterion
    "wrong": 0.0,       # Completely fails criterion
}

PASSING_RATINGS: frozenset[Rating] = frozenset({"excellent", "good"})
```

### Judge Output

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class JudgeOutput:
    """Structured output from judge prompt."""
    rating: Rating  # Categorical label
    reason: str     # Brief explanation


JUDGE_TEMPLATE = PromptTemplate[JudgeOutput](
    ns="wink.evals",
    key="llm-judge",
    name="llm_judge",
    sections=[
        MarkdownSection(
            title="Evaluation Task",
            template="""You are an evaluation judge. Rate the output on the given criterion.

## Criterion
$criterion

## Output to Evaluate
$output

## Reference Answer
$expected

## Rating Scale
- **excellent**: Fully meets the criterion
- **good**: Meets the criterion with minor issues
- **fair**: Partially meets the criterion
- **poor**: Mostly fails the criterion
- **wrong**: Completely fails the criterion

Select one rating and explain your reasoning briefly.""",
            key="task",
        ),
    ],
)
```

### llm_judge Factory

```python
def llm_judge(
    adapter: ProviderAdapter[JudgeOutput],
    criterion: str,
    *,
    bus: Dispatcher,
) -> Evaluator[str, str]:
    """Create evaluator that uses LLM to judge output.

    Args:
        adapter: Provider adapter configured for JudgeOutput
        criterion: What to evaluate (e.g., "factual accuracy", "clarity")
        bus: Dispatcher for creating judge sessions

    Returns:
        Evaluator function that scores string outputs
    """
    def evaluate(output: str, expected: str) -> Score:
        prompt = Prompt(JUDGE_TEMPLATE).bind(
            criterion=criterion,
            output=output,
            expected=expected,
        )
        session = Session(bus=bus, tags={"judge_criterion": criterion})
        response = adapter.evaluate(prompt, session=session)
        rating = response.output.rating
        return Score(
            value=RATING_VALUES[rating],
            passed=rating in PASSING_RATINGS,
            reason=response.output.reason,
        )
    return evaluate
```

**Usage:**

```python
# Use a smaller/cheaper model for judging
judge_adapter = OpenAIAdapter[JudgeOutput](model="gpt-4o-mini")
judge_bus = InProcessDispatcher()

evaluator = all_of(
    contains,  # Must contain expected answer
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "Response is helpful and well-formatted", bus=judge_bus),
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "No hallucinated information", bus=judge_bus),
)
```

## Running Evals

### EvalResult

Result for a single sample:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class EvalResult:
    """Result for one sample."""
    sample_id: str
    score: Score
    latency_ms: int
    error: str | None = None

    @property
    def success(self) -> bool:
        """True if no error occurred."""
        return self.error is None
```

### EvalReport

Aggregate results with computed metrics:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class EvalReport:
    """Aggregate evaluation results."""
    results: tuple[EvalResult, ...]

    @property
    def total(self) -> int:
        """Total number of samples."""
        return len(self.results)

    @property
    def successful(self) -> int:
        """Samples that completed without error."""
        return sum(1 for r in self.results if r.success)

    @property
    def pass_rate(self) -> float:
        """Fraction of successful samples that passed."""
        successful = [r for r in self.results if r.success]
        if not successful:
            return 0.0
        return sum(1 for r in successful if r.score.passed) / len(successful)

    @property
    def mean_score(self) -> float:
        """Mean score across successful samples."""
        successful = [r for r in self.results if r.success]
        if not successful:
            return 0.0
        return sum(r.score.value for r in successful) / len(successful)

    @property
    def mean_latency_ms(self) -> float:
        """Mean latency per sample."""
        if not self.results:
            return 0.0
        return sum(r.latency_ms for r in self.results) / len(self.results)

    def failed_samples(self) -> tuple[EvalResult, ...]:
        """Samples that did not pass."""
        return tuple(r for r in self.results if r.success and not r.score.passed)
```

### run_eval

The core function that ties everything together:

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class SampleEvaluated:
    """Emitted after each sample is evaluated."""
    sample_id: str
    result: EvalResult


def run_eval[I, O, E](
    loop: MainLoop[I, O],
    dataset: tuple[Sample[I, E], ...],
    evaluator: Evaluator[O, E],
    *,
    bus: Dispatcher | None = None,
) -> EvalReport:
    """Run evaluation using MainLoop.

    For each sample in the dataset:
    1. Execute the sample input through MainLoop
    2. Score the output using the evaluator
    3. Record timing
    4. Publish SampleEvaluated event (if bus provided)

    Args:
        loop: MainLoop instance to run samples through
        dataset: Tuple of samples to evaluate
        evaluator: Scoring function for outputs
        bus: Optional Dispatcher for progress notifications

    Returns:
        EvalReport with all results and aggregate metrics
    """
    results: list[EvalResult] = []

    for sample in dataset:
        start = time.monotonic()
        try:
            response, _ = loop.execute(sample.input)
            latency_ms = int((time.monotonic() - start) * 1000)
            score = evaluator(response.output, sample.expected)
            result = EvalResult(
                sample_id=sample.id,
                score=score,
                latency_ms=latency_ms,
            )
        except Exception as e:
            latency_ms = int((time.monotonic() - start) * 1000)
            result = EvalResult(
                sample_id=sample.id,
                score=Score(value=0.0, passed=False, reason=str(e)),
                latency_ms=latency_ms,
                error=str(e),
            )

        results.append(result)
        if bus is not None:
            bus.dispatch(SampleEvaluated(sample_id=sample.id, result=result))

    return EvalReport(results=tuple(results))
```

## Usage Examples

### Basic Evaluation

```python
from weakincentives import MainLoop, PromptTemplate, Prompt, Session
from weakincentives.adapters.openai import OpenAIAdapter
from weakincentives.runtime import InProcessDispatcher
from weakincentives.evals import Sample, run_eval, exact_match, load_jsonl

# Define the loop under test
class QALoop(MainLoop[str, str]):
    def __init__(self, adapter, bus):
        super().__init__(adapter=adapter, bus=bus)
        self._template = PromptTemplate[str](
            ns="qa",
            key="answer",
            name="qa",
            sections=[
                MarkdownSection(
                    title="Question",
                    template="Answer concisely: $question",
                    key="q",
                ),
            ],
        )

    def create_prompt(self, question: str) -> Prompt[str]:
        return Prompt(self._template).bind(question=question)

    def create_session(self) -> Session:
        return Session(bus=self._bus)


# Load dataset
dataset = load_jsonl(Path("tests/fixtures/qa.jsonl"), str, str)

# Run evaluation
adapter = OpenAIAdapter(model="gpt-4o")
loop = QALoop(adapter=adapter, bus=InProcessDispatcher())
report = run_eval(loop, dataset, exact_match)

# Inspect results
print(f"Pass rate: {report.pass_rate:.1%}")
print(f"Mean score: {report.mean_score:.2f}")
print(f"Mean latency: {report.mean_latency_ms:.0f}ms")

# Review failures
for result in report.failed_samples():
    print(f"Failed: {result.sample_id} - {result.score.reason}")
```

### Multi-Criteria Evaluation

```python
from weakincentives.evals import all_of, llm_judge

# Create judge adapter and bus
judge_adapter = OpenAIAdapter[JudgeOutput](model="gpt-4o-mini")
judge_bus = InProcessDispatcher()

# Compose multiple criteria
evaluator = all_of(
    contains,  # Must contain expected substring
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "Factually accurate", bus=judge_bus),
    llm_judge(judge_adapter, "Well-structured response", bus=judge_bus),
)

report = run_eval(loop, dataset, evaluator)
```

### Programmatic Dataset

```python
# Build dataset in code
dataset = tuple(
    Sample(
        id=str(i),
        input=f"What is {a} + {b}?",
        expected=str(a + b),
    )
    for i, (a, b) in enumerate([(1, 1), (2, 3), (10, 20)])
)

report = run_eval(loop, dataset, contains)
```

## Observability

Pass an `Dispatcher` to `run_eval` to receive progress notifications:

```python
from weakincentives.evals import SampleEvaluated

def on_sample(event: SampleEvaluated) -> None:
    status = "PASS" if event.result.score.passed else "FAIL"
    print(f"[{status}] {event.sample_id}: {event.result.score.value:.2f}")

bus = InProcessDispatcher()
bus.subscribe(SampleEvaluated, on_sample)

loop = QALoop(adapter=adapter, bus=InProcessDispatcher())
report = run_eval(loop, dataset, evaluator, bus=bus)
```

With LangSmith enabled, MainLoop executions are automatically traced.

## Testing Evaluators

Evaluators are pure functions—test them directly:

```python
def test_exact_match_pass():
    score = exact_match("hello", "hello")
    assert score.passed is True
    assert score.value == 1.0


def test_exact_match_fail():
    score = exact_match("hello", "world")
    assert score.passed is False
    assert score.value == 0.0


def test_contains_pass():
    score = contains("The answer is 42.", "42")
    assert score.passed is True


def test_all_of_requires_all():
    evaluator = all_of(exact_match, contains)
    score = evaluator("hello", "hello")
    assert score.passed is True

    score = evaluator("hello world", "hello")
    assert score.passed is False  # exact_match fails


def test_any_of_requires_one():
    evaluator = any_of(exact_match, contains)
    score = evaluator("hello world", "hello")
    assert score.passed is True  # contains passes
```

## Limitations

- **Sequential execution** - MainLoop is synchronous; samples run one at a time
- **No caching** - Repeated samples re-execute; add caching at adapter level
- **No checkpoints** - Cannot resume interrupted runs
- **Single loop** - Cannot compare multiple loops in one `run_eval` call
