specs/SESSIONS.md, before:

# Session State Specification

## Overview

Sessions provide a tiny, deterministic state container for agent runs. They listen to
the in-process event bus, collect structured tool payloads and prompt outputs, and
expose the accumulated data through a typed API. Sessions never execute side effects;
all state transitions are pure functions driven by the event stream.

## Minimal Requirements

1. **Typed routing** – Dataclass payloads/outputs map 1:1 to dedicated slices, while
   every tool invocation is also recorded in the generic `ToolInvoked` slice even
   when the handler fails and returns `value=None`.
1. **Pure reducers** – State transitions are pure
   `(tuple[T, ...], DataEvent[T], *, context=ReducerContext) -> tuple[T, ...]`
   functions. Reducers run synchronously on the publisher thread.
1. **Event bus integration** – Sessions subscribe to `PromptRendered`, `ToolInvoked`,
   and `PromptExecuted` from `weakincentives.runtime.events`. They ignore every
   other event type. Each session and event carries a UUID identifier plus a
   timezone-aware creation timestamp for downstream correlation.
1. **Default behavior that works** – Without custom reducers, the Session appends new
   dataclass values (deduping by equality) and keeps results immutable.
1. **Flexible slices** – Reducers may manage a slice whose element type differs from
   the incoming dataclass value so Sessions can maintain derived aggregates.

## Terminology

- `DataEvent[T]` – Events dispatched to reducers. `ToolInvoked` and
  `PromptExecuted` provide a `.value` field that may reference a dataclass payload
  or `None`. `PromptRendered` exposes itself via `.value` to align with the same
  reducer contract.
- **Slice** – The tuple of accumulated dataclass instances managed for a reducer.
  The slice element type may be the same as `T` or a separate dataclass.
- **Reducer** – A pure function responsible for producing a new slice when a
  matching `DataEvent[T]` arrives.
- **Snapshot** – An immutable value object that captures the mapping of slice
  types to their tuples plus metadata such as timestamps.
- **Snapshot tuple** – The tuple stored for a specific slice within a snapshot;
  it mirrors the reducer-managed slice tuple at capture time.

## Data Model

```python
from weakincentives.runtime.events import PromptExecuted, PromptRendered, ToolInvoked
from weakincentives.runtime.session import ReducerContext

DataEvent = ToolInvoked | PromptExecuted | PromptRendered

class TypedReducer(Protocol[S]):
    def __call__(
        self,
        slice_values: tuple[S, ...],
        event: DataEvent,
        *,
        context: ReducerContext,
    ) -> tuple[S, ...]: ...
```

Session state is an immutable mapping from a **slice type** to a tuple of dataclass
instances. When the slice type matches the data type, the tuple contains the raw
event values. Reducers may also register an explicit slice type to store derived
structures.

## Public API Surface

```
src/weakincentives/session/
  session.py      # Session, DataEvent, reducer plumbing
  reducers.py     # append (default), helper factories
  selectors.py    # optional helpers built on top of Session.select_all
```

### Session

```python
class Session:
    def __init__(self, *, bus: EventBus,
                 session_id: UUID | None = None,
                 created_at: datetime | None = None) -> None: ...

    def clone(
        self,
        *,
        bus: EventBus,
        session_id: UUID | None = None,
        created_at: datetime | None = None,
    ) -> "Session": ...

    def register_reducer[T, S](
        self,
        data_type: type[T],
        reducer: TypedReducer[T, S],
        *,
        slice_type: type[S] | None = None,
    ) -> None: ...

    def select_all[S](self, slice_type: type[S]) -> tuple[S, ...]: ...

    def snapshot(self) -> Snapshot: ...

    def rollback(self, snapshot: Snapshot) -> None: ...


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class Snapshot:
    created_at: datetime
    slices: Mapping[type[Any], tuple[Any, ...]]

    def to_json(self) -> str: ...

    @classmethod
    def from_json(cls, raw: str) -> Snapshot: ...
```

- Constructing with a bus subscribes to `PromptRendered`, `ToolInvoked`, and
  `PromptExecuted` immediately.
- Multiple reducers may register for the same data type; they run in registration
  order and each maintains its own slice.
- `slice_type` defaults to `data_type`. When provided it controls the tuple type the
  reducer receives and returns.
- Reducers never mutate the previous tuple; they always return a new tuple instance.
- `clone` produces a new Session instance that preserves the current state snapshot
  and reducer registrations. Passing `bus`, `session_id`, or `created_at` overrides
  the copied metadata; omitted parameters reuse the original values. Clones attach
  to the provided event bus without modifying the original session subscription.
- When callers omit `session_id` or `created_at`, the constructor automatically
  generates a UUID (`uuid4()`) and captures `datetime.now(UTC)` respectively. The
  timestamp MUST be timezone-aware; naive datetimes raise `ValueError`.
- `snapshot()` captures the immutable slice mapping without blocking event
  publication and returns a value object representing the captured state.
- `rollback()` replaces the Session's slice mapping with the tuples stored in the
  provided snapshot without emitting new events.

### Reducers

Provide three reducers (each accepts the keyword-only `context` argument and may
ignore it when unused):

1. `append` – Default behavior, dedupes by equality.
1. `upsert_by(key_fn)` – Replaces items that share the same derived key.
1. `replace_latest` – Stores only the most recent value.

`ReducerContext` instances bundle the active `Session` and event bus for the
current invocation. Callers construct a fresh context per event and pass it as the
`context=` keyword argument so reducers can inspect session state or publish their
own events without resorting to global lookups.

### Selectors

A minimal helper module offers:

- `select_all(session, slice_type)` – Returns the tuple slice for the registered type.
- `select_latest(session, slice_type)` – Returns the last item or `None`.
- `select_where(session, slice_type, pred)` – Filters the slice by predicate.

These helpers delegate to `Session.select_all` and perform no caching.

## Event Handling Rules

1. On `PromptRendered`, dispatch the rendered prompt event directly so reducers
   can persist prompt metadata alongside later outputs.
1. On `ToolInvoked`, dispatch the event regardless of success. When
   `result.value` is a dataclass, re-dispatch the same event (with `.value`
   populated) to the payload's concrete type.
1. On `PromptExecuted`, dispatch the event to its dedicated slice. If the
   response contains dataclass outputs, re-dispatch the event with `.value`
   populated for each dataclass item (cloning the event when multiple payloads
   exist).
1. Every normalized `DataEvent` is passed to the reducer chain registered for its
   target type. Each reducer operates on the tuple registered for its `slice_type`.
   If no reducer exists, use the default append reducer.
1. Reducer failures are caught and logged; the slice stays unchanged.

## Snapshot Capture and Rollback

Snapshots add time-travel support so callers can capture the Session's slice
mapping, serialize it for storage or transport, and later roll the Session back to
that exact point. They behave as immutable value objects—copying, storing, and
restoring a snapshot never mutates the original payload or the Session's event
subscriptions. Reducer registrations, event bus wiring, and pending dispatch
state stay outside the snapshot because they are inherent to the Session
instance.

### Serialization Strategy

Snapshots serialize to JSON using only primitive types. Persist metadata fields
(`created_at` as a timezone-aware ISO 8601 string plus an API version) alongside
the captured slices. Each slice entry serializes as a dictionary containing
`"slice_type"`, `"item_type"`, and `"items"`. Type fields use the fully qualified
`"package.module:Class"` form, and items rely on the existing dataclass serde
helpers (`src/weakincentives/serde/`). Reducer slices whose element type differs
from the incoming dataclass must still record the item type explicitly. The
`Snapshot.to_json()` and `Snapshot.from_json()` helpers round-trip the payload; the
deserialized snapshot must compare equal to the original.

### State Capture Semantics

1. `snapshot()` reads the immutable slice mapping and packages it into a new
   `Snapshot` without requiring defensive copies or synchronization.
1. Active reducers finish before capture completes; events published afterward are
   excluded. Callers should snapshot only after their own dispatch loop completes
   to avoid missing in-flight updates.
1. `rollback()` replaces the current slice mapping with the tuples stored in the
   snapshot. Slices present in the Session but absent from the snapshot clear to
   empty tuples. Reducer registrations persist and continue receiving events with
   their restored tuples.

### Error Handling

- `snapshot()` raises `SnapshotSerializationError` when encountering unsupported
  slice types or unserializable payloads and leaves the Session unchanged.
- `rollback()` raises `SnapshotRestoreError` if the snapshot schema version is
  incompatible or if referenced slice types were never registered. On failure the
  Session state remains untouched.

## Testing Checklist

- Publishing `ToolInvoked` / `PromptExecuted` populates the correct slice exactly once.
- Reducer registration order is respected, and absence of reducers falls back to the
  default append implementation.
- Non-dataclass payloads populate the generic `ToolInvoked` slice while leaving
  dataclass-specific slices untouched.
- Reducers may register a distinct `slice_type` and still receive the correct tuple.
- `Session.snapshot()` / `Session.rollback()` round-trip keeps slice tuples and
  timestamps consistent (timestamp deltas tolerated when comparing equality if
  necessary).
- Reducers registered before snapshot capture remain functional after rollback
  and continue processing future events with the restored tuples.
- Snapshot serialization and restore failures raise the documented exceptions and
  leave Session state untouched.

## Usage Sketch

```python
bus = InProcessEventBus()
session = Session(bus=bus)

# Optional reducer wiring
session.register_reducer(SourceDetails, upsert_by(lambda d: d.source_id))
session.register_reducer(
    ResearchSummary,
    reducer_that_updates_metrics,
    slice_type=ResearchMetrics,
)

# Evaluate prompts/tools with adapters that publish events...

latest_summary = select_latest(session, ResearchSummary)
metrics = select_all(session, ResearchMetrics)
```

Sessions keep the orchestration loop deterministic and easy to test while staying as
small as possible.

Commit message:

Document token ledger session events

specs/SESSIONS.md, after:

# Session State Specification

## Overview

Sessions provide a tiny, deterministic state container for agent runs. They listen to
the in-process event bus, collect structured tool payloads and prompt outputs, and
expose the accumulated data through a typed API. Sessions never execute side effects;
all state transitions are pure functions driven by the event stream.

## Minimal Requirements

1. **Typed routing** – Dataclass payloads/outputs map 1:1 to dedicated slices, while
   every tool invocation is also recorded in the generic `ToolInvoked` slice even
   when the handler fails and returns `value=None`.
1. **Pure reducers** – State transitions are pure
   `(tuple[T, ...], DataEvent[T], *, context=ReducerContext) -> tuple[T, ...]`
   functions. Reducers run synchronously on the publisher thread.
1. **Event bus integration** – Sessions subscribe to `PromptRendered`, `ToolInvoked`,
   `PromptExecuted`, and `TokenLedgerUpdated` from `weakincentives.runtime.events`.
   They ignore every other event type. Each session and event carries a UUID
   identifier plus a timezone-aware creation timestamp for downstream
   correlation.
1. **Default behavior that works** – Without custom reducers, the Session appends new
   dataclass values (deduping by equality) and keeps results immutable.
1. **Flexible slices** – Reducers may manage a slice whose element type differs from
   the incoming dataclass value so Sessions can maintain derived aggregates.

## Terminology

- `DataEvent[T]` – Events dispatched to reducers. `ToolInvoked` and
  `PromptExecuted` provide a `.value` field that may reference a dataclass payload
  or `None`. `PromptRendered` exposes itself via `.value` to align with the same
  reducer contract.
- **Slice** – The tuple of accumulated dataclass instances managed for a reducer.
  The slice element type may be the same as `T` or a separate dataclass.
- **Reducer** – A pure function responsible for producing a new slice when a
  matching `DataEvent[T]` arrives.
- **Snapshot** – An immutable value object that captures the mapping of slice
  types to their tuples plus metadata such as timestamps.
- **Snapshot tuple** – The tuple stored for a specific slice within a snapshot;
  it mirrors the reducer-managed slice tuple at capture time.

## Data Model

```python
from weakincentives.runtime.events import (
    PromptExecuted,
    PromptRendered,
    TokenLedgerUpdated,
    ToolInvoked,
)
from weakincentives.runtime.session import ReducerContext

DataEvent = ToolInvoked | PromptExecuted | PromptRendered | TokenLedgerUpdated

class TypedReducer(Protocol[S]):
    def __call__(
        self,
        slice_values: tuple[S, ...],
        event: DataEvent,
        *,
        context: ReducerContext,
    ) -> tuple[S, ...]: ...
```

Session state is an immutable mapping from a **slice type** to a tuple of dataclass
instances. When the slice type matches the data type, the tuple contains the raw
event values. Reducers may also register an explicit slice type to store derived
structures.

## Public API Surface

```
src/weakincentives/session/
  session.py      # Session, DataEvent, reducer plumbing
  reducers.py     # append (default), helper factories
  selectors.py    # optional helpers built on top of Session.select_all
```

### Session

```python
class Session:
    def __init__(self, *, bus: EventBus,
                 session_id: UUID | None = None,
                 created_at: datetime | None = None) -> None: ...

    def clone(
        self,
        *,
        bus: EventBus,
        session_id: UUID | None = None,
        created_at: datetime | None = None,
    ) -> "Session": ...

    def register_reducer[T, S](
        self,
        data_type: type[T],
        reducer: TypedReducer[T, S],
        *,
        slice_type: type[S] | None = None,
    ) -> None: ...

    def select_all[S](self, slice_type: type[S]) -> tuple[S, ...]: ...

    def snapshot(self) -> Snapshot: ...

    def rollback(self, snapshot: Snapshot) -> None: ...


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class Snapshot:
    created_at: datetime
    slices: Mapping[type[Any], tuple[Any, ...]]

    def to_json(self) -> str: ...

    @classmethod
    def from_json(cls, raw: str) -> Snapshot: ...
```

- Constructing with a bus subscribes to `PromptRendered`, `ToolInvoked`, and
  `PromptExecuted` immediately.
- Multiple reducers may register for the same data type; they run in registration
  order and each maintains its own slice.
- `slice_type` defaults to `data_type`. When provided it controls the tuple type the
  reducer receives and returns.
- Reducers never mutate the previous tuple; they always return a new tuple instance.
- `clone` produces a new Session instance that preserves the current state snapshot
  and reducer registrations. Passing `bus`, `session_id`, or `created_at` overrides
  the copied metadata; omitted parameters reuse the original values. Clones attach
  to the provided event bus without modifying the original session subscription.
- When callers omit `session_id` or `created_at`, the constructor automatically
  generates a UUID (`uuid4()`) and captures `datetime.now(UTC)` respectively. The
  timestamp MUST be timezone-aware; naive datetimes raise `ValueError`.
- `snapshot()` captures the immutable slice mapping without blocking event
  publication and returns a value object representing the captured state.
- `rollback()` replaces the Session's slice mapping with the tuples stored in the
  provided snapshot without emitting new events.

### Reducers

Provide three reducers (each accepts the keyword-only `context` argument and may
ignore it when unused):

1. `append` – Default behavior, dedupes by equality.
1. `upsert_by(key_fn)` – Replaces items that share the same derived key.
1. `replace_latest` – Stores only the most recent value.

`ReducerContext` instances bundle the active `Session` and event bus for the
current invocation. Callers construct a fresh context per event and pass it as the
`context=` keyword argument so reducers can inspect session state or publish their
own events without resorting to global lookups.

### Selectors

A minimal helper module offers:

- `select_all(session, slice_type)` – Returns the tuple slice for the registered type.
- `select_latest(session, slice_type)` – Returns the last item or `None`.
- `select_where(session, slice_type, pred)` – Filters the slice by predicate.

These helpers delegate to `Session.select_all` and perform no caching.

## Event Handling Rules

1. On `PromptRendered`, dispatch the rendered prompt event directly so reducers
   can persist prompt metadata alongside later outputs.
1. On `ToolInvoked`, dispatch the event regardless of success. When
   `result.value` is a dataclass, re-dispatch the same event (with `.value`
   populated) to the payload's concrete type.
1. On `PromptExecuted`, dispatch the event to its dedicated slice. If the
   response contains dataclass outputs, re-dispatch the event with `.value`
   populated for each dataclass item (cloning the event when multiple payloads
   exist).
1. On `TokenLedgerUpdated`, dispatch the event to its dedicated slice. Reducers
   MAY maintain derived aggregates such as running balances or limit breaches by
   reading the `TokenLedgerUpdated.aggregate` and `.providers` totals. The
   default append reducer keeps the chronological history intact for downstream
   inspection.
1. Every normalized `DataEvent` is passed to the reducer chain registered for its
   target type. Each reducer operates on the tuple registered for its `slice_type`.
   If no reducer exists, use the default append reducer.
1. Reducer failures are caught and logged; the slice stays unchanged.

## Snapshot Capture and Rollback

Snapshots add time-travel support so callers can capture the Session's slice
mapping, serialize it for storage or transport, and later roll the Session back to
that exact point. They behave as immutable value objects—copying, storing, and
restoring a snapshot never mutates the original payload or the Session's event
subscriptions. Reducer registrations, event bus wiring, and pending dispatch
state stay outside the snapshot because they are inherent to the Session
instance.

### Serialization Strategy

Snapshots serialize to JSON using only primitive types. Persist metadata fields
(`created_at` as a timezone-aware ISO 8601 string plus an API version) alongside
the captured slices. Each slice entry serializes as a dictionary containing
`"slice_type"`, `"item_type"`, and `"items"`. Type fields use the fully qualified
`"package.module:Class"` form, and items rely on the existing dataclass serde
helpers (`src/weakincentives/serde/`). Reducer slices whose element type differs
from the incoming dataclass must still record the item type explicitly. The
`Snapshot.to_json()` and `Snapshot.from_json()` helpers round-trip the payload; the
deserialized snapshot must compare equal to the original.

### State Capture Semantics

1. `snapshot()` reads the immutable slice mapping and packages it into a new
   `Snapshot` without requiring defensive copies or synchronization.
1. Active reducers finish before capture completes; events published afterward are
   excluded. Callers should snapshot only after their own dispatch loop completes
   to avoid missing in-flight updates.
1. `rollback()` replaces the current slice mapping with the tuples stored in the
   snapshot. Slices present in the Session but absent from the snapshot clear to
   empty tuples. Reducer registrations persist and continue receiving events with
   their restored tuples.

### Error Handling

- `snapshot()` raises `SnapshotSerializationError` when encountering unsupported
  slice types or unserializable payloads and leaves the Session unchanged.
- `rollback()` raises `SnapshotRestoreError` if the snapshot schema version is
  incompatible or if referenced slice types were never registered. On failure the
  Session state remains untouched.

## Testing Checklist

- Publishing `ToolInvoked` / `PromptExecuted` populates the correct slice exactly once.
- Reducer registration order is respected, and absence of reducers falls back to the
  default append implementation.
- Non-dataclass payloads populate the generic `ToolInvoked` slice while leaving
  dataclass-specific slices untouched.
- Reducers may register a distinct `slice_type` and still receive the correct tuple.
- `Session.snapshot()` / `Session.rollback()` round-trip keeps slice tuples and
  timestamps consistent (timestamp deltas tolerated when comparing equality if
  necessary).
- Reducers registered before snapshot capture remain functional after rollback
  and continue processing future events with the restored tuples.
- Snapshot serialization and restore failures raise the documented exceptions and
  leave Session state untouched.

## Usage Sketch

```python
bus = InProcessEventBus()
session = Session(bus=bus)

# Optional reducer wiring
session.register_reducer(SourceDetails, upsert_by(lambda d: d.source_id))
session.register_reducer(
    ResearchSummary,
    reducer_that_updates_metrics,
    slice_type=ResearchMetrics,
)

# Evaluate prompts/tools with adapters that publish events...

latest_summary = select_latest(session, ResearchSummary)
metrics = select_all(session, ResearchMetrics)
```

Sessions keep the orchestration loop deterministic and easy to test while staying as
small as possible.
