specs/VFS_TOOLS.md, before:

# Virtual Filesystem Tool Suite Specification

## Overview

The virtual filesystem tool suite gives agents a deterministic, session-scoped surface for file reads and writes without
touching the host disk. It supports lightweight workspace snapshots: list directories, inspect file metadata, edit file
contents, and preload selected host folders during initialisation while the session stays isolated. Snapshots are
copy-on-write, start empty automatically, and disappear when the session ends; no state persists across conversations.

## Module Surface

- VFS code lives in `weakincentives.tools.vfs`.
- Tool validation errors reuse `ToolValidationError` from `weakincentives.tools.errors`.
- `VfsToolsSection` is the public entry point. It wires the tool definitions, prompt copy, reducer registrations, and
  optional host folder mounts so orchestrators add the section once per session.
- Host folder mounts are declared via the `HostMount` dataclass and supplied through the section's `mounts` argument.
  The rendered prompt appends a "Configured host mounts" appendix that previews each mount's root directory (equivalent to
  running `ls` on the mount source) so agents can see the initial workspace surface. File mounts render the target
  filename directly in the list while directory mounts show a single-level listing of child entries.

## Session Integration

- `VfsToolsSection` is constructed with the `Session` that backs the tool
  handlers so state is registered before any tool invocation.
- Reducers register during construction: `VirtualFileSystem` uses `replace_latest`, the write/delete reducers attach to
  the same slice, and the mount snapshot seeds the initial state.
- Reducers always clone the current `VirtualFileSystem` before applying changes to keep snapshots immutable to callers.
- Orchestrators retrieve the active snapshot with `select_latest(session, VirtualFileSystem)` and should treat `None`
  as an empty filesystem until the first write occurs.
- Host folder mounts configured on the section are materialised when the section is constructed and merged into the
  initial snapshot immediately.
- Tool handlers run normalization and validation outside the reducer, returning informative status messages alongside
  the params dataclass used for the update.

## Data Model

Schemas are frozen dataclasses and store normalized POSIX-style paths. Paths are relative, ASCII-only, and split into
segments that exclude `.` and `..`. Handlers collapse duplicate slashes and reject empty segments so reducers can trust
the canonical form.

```python
from __future__ import annotations

from dataclasses import dataclass, field
from datetime import datetime, timezone
from typing import Literal

FileEncoding = Literal["utf-8"]
WriteMode = Literal["create", "overwrite", "append"]


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class VfsPath:
    # Relative path segments (e.g. ("src", "main.py"))
    segments: tuple[str, ...]


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class VfsFile:
    path: VfsPath
    content: str
    encoding: FileEncoding
    size_bytes: int
    version: int
    created_at: datetime
    updated_at: datetime


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class VirtualFileSystem:
    files: tuple[VfsFile, ...] = field(default_factory=tuple)


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ListDirectory:
    path: VfsPath | None = None  # None lists root


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReadFile:
    path: VfsPath


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class WriteFile:
    path: VfsPath
    content: str
    mode: WriteMode = "create"
    encoding: FileEncoding = "utf-8"


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class DeleteEntry:
    path: VfsPath


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class HostMount:
    host_path: str
    mount_path: VfsPath | None = None
    include_glob: tuple[str, ...] = field(default_factory=tuple)
    exclude_glob: tuple[str, ...] = field(default_factory=tuple)
    max_bytes: int | None = None
    follow_symlinks: bool = False
```

`HostMount` instances are provided when constructing `VfsToolsSection`; they are never exposed as interactive tools to
agents.

Implementation detail notes:

- `VirtualFileSystem.files` stores files as a tuple sorted lexicographically by path segments for stable diffs.
- Reducers maintain monotonically increasing `version` numbers per file per snapshot. When `WriteFile.mode` is
  `append`, the reducer concatenates new content and increments the version.
- `created_at` and `updated_at` are stored as timezone-aware UTC timestamps (truncated to millisecond precision). The
  reducer sets both timestamps during creation and only `updated_at` on subsequent writes.
- If no snapshot exists when a tool runs, reducers start from an empty `VirtualFileSystem()` instance automatically.
- The suite enforces size and path guards:
  - Maximum content length per write: 48_000 characters.
  - Maximum path depth: 16 segments; maximum segment length: 80 characters.
  - File content must be valid UTF-8 text; path segments remain ASCII-only.
- Each `HostMount` requires an ASCII `host_path`, resolves it against an allow-listed root configured by the
  orchestrator, normalises it to an absolute path, and rejects traversal outside the approved surface. Included files
  are streamed into memory, decoded as UTF-8, filtered through the glob include/exclude lists, and mounted under
  `mount_path` (or the host relative path when `mount_path` is `None`). Existing VFS entries at the target paths are
  overwritten, directory structures merge, and `max_bytes` caps the aggregate content pulled from disk. Mounting occurs
  once during `VfsToolsSection` initialisation.
- `DeleteEntry` removes files under the exact path. Directories are implicit; removing a directory path deletes all
  files with that prefix.
- Directory listings render shallow entries only (files or immediate directories below the target path). The handler
  performs the projection so reducers only deal with structural updates.

## Tool Contracts

Every tool validates its parameters and raises `ToolValidationError` on failure. Successful invocations publish the new
`VirtualFileSystem` snapshot via the reducer pipeline. The exposed surface mirrors the DeepAgents filesystem
implementation so that orchestration layers can reuse the same prompts, backend contracts, and reducer wiring.

| Tool | Summary | Parameters | Result | Behaviour highlights |
| ---- | ------- | ---------- | ------ | -------------------- |
| `ls` | List directory entries | `path: str` | `FileInfo[]` | Absolute-style VFS paths resolve relative to the session root (`"/"`). Returns shallow listings with file metadata when available. Raises if the normalised path targets a file. |
| `read_file` | Read file content | `file_path: str`, `offset: int = 0`, `limit: int = 2000` | `str` | Streams numbered lines starting at `offset` (line-based pagination). Returns a human-readable error string for missing files. Rejects binary content and preserves UTF-8 text only. |
| `write_file` | Create a new text file | `file_path: str`, `content: str` | `WriteResult` | Create-only semantics: rejects existing targets. Normalises UTF-8 content, enforces size limits, and reports structured errors when validation fails. |
| `edit_file` | Replace text within an existing file | `file_path: str`, `old_string: str`, `new_string: str`, `replace_all: bool = False` | `EditResult` | Performs exact string substitution. When `replace_all=False`, requires a unique match; otherwise replaces every occurrence. Maintains version counters and timestamps on success. |
| `glob` | Match files by shell pattern | `pattern: str`, `path: str = "/"` | `FileInfo[]` | Evaluates glob patterns relative to the supplied path (default root). Returns sorted matches with metadata. |
| `grep` | Search files with a regex | `pattern: str`, `path: Optional[str] = None`, `glob: Optional[str] = None` | `list[GrepMatch] \| str` | Executes regex searches scoped by directory or glob. Invalid regexes return readable error strings. Binary files are skipped, mirroring ripgrep defaults. |
| `rm` | Remove files or directories | `path: str` | `DeleteResult` | Deletes the specified path. Works on individual files or directories and removes nested entries recursively. Returns structured errors when the path is missing. |

The suite keeps a delete helper internally for reducers (`DeleteEntry`). Tool handlers normalise targets so `DeleteEntry` removes any file directly and prunes directories by recursively deleting files with the matching prefix. The interactive surface now exposes this behaviour through the `rm` command alongside the other DeepAgents-aligned tools above.

## Prompt Template Guidance

`VfsToolsSection` emits markdown instructing agents to:

1. Remember the virtual filesystem starts empty aside from any host mounts configured by the orchestrator; create files
   via `write_file` and update them with `edit_file` when needed.
1. Review the "Configured host mounts" appendix for a quick summary of mirrored directories and their top-level contents
   before issuing exploration commands.
1. Host mounts are configuration-time only; agents cannot import additional host directories during a session.
1. Use `ls` and `glob` to explore before reading or writing specific files; keep listings targeted to minimise
   output volume.
1. Fetch file contents with `read_file` when context is needed, and rely on pagination parameters for large files to
   avoid oversized responses.
1. Apply edits with `write_file` (create) or `edit_file` (modify), keeping updates concise and UTF-8-only; prefer
   overwriting complete files instead of issuing multiple appends unless streaming logs.
1. Remove stale files or directories with `rm`; recursive deletions mirror the reducer's `DeleteEntry` semantics, so double-check targets before issuing the command.
1. Use `grep` to locate relevant symbols when the project surface grows; remember binary files are skipped by
   default.
1. Avoid mirroring large repositories or binary assets; orchestrated host mounts should stay focused, and the enforced
   size limit still applies.

The section follows the shared prompt conventions (`specs/PROMPTS.md`) and adds all VFS tool definitions to
`RenderedPrompt.tools`.

## Usage Sketch

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass
from weakincentives.runtime.events import InProcessEventBus
from weakincentives.prompt import MarkdownSection, Prompt
from weakincentives.runtime.session import Session
from weakincentives.runtime.session.selectors import select_latest
from weakincentives.tools import vfs

bus = InProcessEventBus()
session = Session(bus=bus)

prompt = Prompt(
    ns="agents/background",
    key="workspace",
    name="workspace-tools",
    sections=[
        MarkdownSection(
            title="Behaviour",
            template="Use the virtual filesystem to stage edits before applying them to the host workspace.",
        ),
        vfs.VfsToolsSection(
            mounts=(
                vfs.HostMount(
                    host_path="docs/",
                    mount_path=vfs.VfsPath(("docs",)),
                    include_glob=("*.md",),
                ),
            ),
        ),
    ],
)

rendered = prompt.render(None)
# Snapshots appear after the first tool invocation; select_latest returns None
# until a handler observes the session.
```

Host mounts are optional; omit the `mounts` argument to start from an entirely empty virtual filesystem.

Adapters emit `ToolInvoked` events through the shared bus; reducers inside `VfsToolsSection` handle persistence
automatically.

## Telemetry

No additional telemetry is required beyond the default event stream. Tool handlers include structured fields in
`ToolInvoked` payloads (path, mode, result size) so downstream analytics can observe usage patterns without custom
instrumentation.

## Testing Checklist

- Unit tests for path normalization and validation, including rejection of absolute paths, `..`, and non-ASCII segments.
- Reducer tests covering create/overwrite/append flows, version increments, and timestamp updates.
- Host mount tests validating allow-list enforcement, glob inclusion/exclusion, `max_bytes` capping, duplicate path
  handling, and deterministic merging when mounts overlap.
- Tests ensuring directory deletion removes all nested files while leaving unrelated paths untouched.
- Prompt snapshot tests verifying `VfsToolsSection` renders instructions and advertises all tools.
- End-to-end scenario: start from the empty VFS (optionally with configured host mounts), list directories, read/write
  files, and confirm session snapshots update with each tool call.

## Documentation Tasks

- Add `vfs_tools_example.py` showing typical usage alongside the planning tools.
- Update `README.md` to mention the virtual filesystem capabilities and link to this specification.
- Generate API reference entries for `VirtualFileSystem`, tool dataclasses, and the handlers in
  `weakincentives.tools.vfs`.
- Document the host mount allow list configuration and security considerations in `AGENTS.md`.

Commit message:

Document section and chapter cloning

specs/VFS_TOOLS.md, after:

# Virtual Filesystem Tool Suite Specification

## Overview

The virtual filesystem tool suite gives agents a deterministic, session-scoped surface for file reads and writes without
touching the host disk. It supports lightweight workspace snapshots: list directories, inspect file metadata, edit file
contents, and preload selected host folders during initialisation while the session stays isolated. Snapshots are
copy-on-write, start empty automatically, and disappear when the session ends; no state persists across conversations.

## Module Surface

- VFS code lives in `weakincentives.tools.vfs`.
- Tool validation errors reuse `ToolValidationError` from `weakincentives.tools.errors`.
- `VfsToolsSection` is the public entry point. It wires the tool definitions, prompt copy, reducer registrations, and
  optional host folder mounts so orchestrators add the section once per session.
- Host folder mounts are declared via the `HostMount` dataclass and supplied through the section's `mounts` argument.
  The rendered prompt appends a "Configured host mounts" appendix that previews each mount's root directory (equivalent to
  running `ls` on the mount source) so agents can see the initial workspace surface. File mounts render the target
  filename directly in the list while directory mounts show a single-level listing of child entries.

## Session Integration

- `VfsToolsSection` is constructed with the `Session` that backs the tool
  handlers so state is registered before any tool invocation.
- Reducers register during construction: `VirtualFileSystem` uses `replace_latest`, the write/delete reducers attach to
  the same slice, and the mount snapshot seeds the initial state.
- Reducers always clone the current `VirtualFileSystem` before applying changes to keep snapshots immutable to callers.
- Orchestrators retrieve the active snapshot with `select_latest(session, VirtualFileSystem)` and should treat `None`
  as an empty filesystem until the first write occurs.
- Host folder mounts configured on the section are materialised when the section is constructed and merged into the
  initial snapshot immediately.
- Tool handlers run normalization and validation outside the reducer, returning informative status messages alongside
  the params dataclass used for the update.
- `VfsToolsSection.clone(session=..., bus=...)` returns a fully decoupled copy of the
  section. The clone MUST re-register reducers against the supplied session, bind
  tool handlers to the provided event bus, and reapply host mount hydration so the
  resulting prompt can mutate its own virtual filesystem without touching the
  original section's state.

## Data Model

Schemas are frozen dataclasses and store normalized POSIX-style paths. Paths are relative, ASCII-only, and split into
segments that exclude `.` and `..`. Handlers collapse duplicate slashes and reject empty segments so reducers can trust
the canonical form.

```python
from __future__ import annotations

from dataclasses import dataclass, field
from datetime import datetime, timezone
from typing import Literal

FileEncoding = Literal["utf-8"]
WriteMode = Literal["create", "overwrite", "append"]


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class VfsPath:
    # Relative path segments (e.g. ("src", "main.py"))
    segments: tuple[str, ...]


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class VfsFile:
    path: VfsPath
    content: str
    encoding: FileEncoding
    size_bytes: int
    version: int
    created_at: datetime
    updated_at: datetime


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class VirtualFileSystem:
    files: tuple[VfsFile, ...] = field(default_factory=tuple)


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ListDirectory:
    path: VfsPath | None = None  # None lists root


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ReadFile:
    path: VfsPath


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class WriteFile:
    path: VfsPath
    content: str
    mode: WriteMode = "create"
    encoding: FileEncoding = "utf-8"


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class DeleteEntry:
    path: VfsPath


@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class HostMount:
    host_path: str
    mount_path: VfsPath | None = None
    include_glob: tuple[str, ...] = field(default_factory=tuple)
    exclude_glob: tuple[str, ...] = field(default_factory=tuple)
    max_bytes: int | None = None
    follow_symlinks: bool = False
```

`HostMount` instances are provided when constructing `VfsToolsSection`; they are never exposed as interactive tools to
agents.

Implementation detail notes:

- `VirtualFileSystem.files` stores files as a tuple sorted lexicographically by path segments for stable diffs.
- Reducers maintain monotonically increasing `version` numbers per file per snapshot. When `WriteFile.mode` is
  `append`, the reducer concatenates new content and increments the version.
- `created_at` and `updated_at` are stored as timezone-aware UTC timestamps (truncated to millisecond precision). The
  reducer sets both timestamps during creation and only `updated_at` on subsequent writes.
- If no snapshot exists when a tool runs, reducers start from an empty `VirtualFileSystem()` instance automatically.
- The suite enforces size and path guards:
  - Maximum content length per write: 48_000 characters.
  - Maximum path depth: 16 segments; maximum segment length: 80 characters.
  - File content must be valid UTF-8 text; path segments remain ASCII-only.
- Each `HostMount` requires an ASCII `host_path`, resolves it against an allow-listed root configured by the
  orchestrator, normalises it to an absolute path, and rejects traversal outside the approved surface. Included files
  are streamed into memory, decoded as UTF-8, filtered through the glob include/exclude lists, and mounted under
  `mount_path` (or the host relative path when `mount_path` is `None`). Existing VFS entries at the target paths are
  overwritten, directory structures merge, and `max_bytes` caps the aggregate content pulled from disk. Mounting occurs
  once during `VfsToolsSection` initialisation.
- `DeleteEntry` removes files under the exact path. Directories are implicit; removing a directory path deletes all
  files with that prefix.
- Directory listings render shallow entries only (files or immediate directories below the target path). The handler
  performs the projection so reducers only deal with structural updates.

## Tool Contracts

Every tool validates its parameters and raises `ToolValidationError` on failure. Successful invocations publish the new
`VirtualFileSystem` snapshot via the reducer pipeline. The exposed surface mirrors the DeepAgents filesystem
implementation so that orchestration layers can reuse the same prompts, backend contracts, and reducer wiring.

| Tool | Summary | Parameters | Result | Behaviour highlights |
| ---- | ------- | ---------- | ------ | -------------------- |
| `ls` | List directory entries | `path: str` | `FileInfo[]` | Absolute-style VFS paths resolve relative to the session root (`"/"`). Returns shallow listings with file metadata when available. Raises if the normalised path targets a file. |
| `read_file` | Read file content | `file_path: str`, `offset: int = 0`, `limit: int = 2000` | `str` | Streams numbered lines starting at `offset` (line-based pagination). Returns a human-readable error string for missing files. Rejects binary content and preserves UTF-8 text only. |
| `write_file` | Create a new text file | `file_path: str`, `content: str` | `WriteResult` | Create-only semantics: rejects existing targets. Normalises UTF-8 content, enforces size limits, and reports structured errors when validation fails. |
| `edit_file` | Replace text within an existing file | `file_path: str`, `old_string: str`, `new_string: str`, `replace_all: bool = False` | `EditResult` | Performs exact string substitution. When `replace_all=False`, requires a unique match; otherwise replaces every occurrence. Maintains version counters and timestamps on success. |
| `glob` | Match files by shell pattern | `pattern: str`, `path: str = "/"` | `FileInfo[]` | Evaluates glob patterns relative to the supplied path (default root). Returns sorted matches with metadata. |
| `grep` | Search files with a regex | `pattern: str`, `path: Optional[str] = None`, `glob: Optional[str] = None` | `list[GrepMatch] \| str` | Executes regex searches scoped by directory or glob. Invalid regexes return readable error strings. Binary files are skipped, mirroring ripgrep defaults. |
| `rm` | Remove files or directories | `path: str` | `DeleteResult` | Deletes the specified path. Works on individual files or directories and removes nested entries recursively. Returns structured errors when the path is missing. |

The suite keeps a delete helper internally for reducers (`DeleteEntry`). Tool handlers normalise targets so `DeleteEntry` removes any file directly and prunes directories by recursively deleting files with the matching prefix. The interactive surface now exposes this behaviour through the `rm` command alongside the other DeepAgents-aligned tools above.

## Prompt Template Guidance

`VfsToolsSection` emits markdown instructing agents to:

1. Remember the virtual filesystem starts empty aside from any host mounts configured by the orchestrator; create files
   via `write_file` and update them with `edit_file` when needed.
1. Review the "Configured host mounts" appendix for a quick summary of mirrored directories and their top-level contents
   before issuing exploration commands.
1. Host mounts are configuration-time only; agents cannot import additional host directories during a session.
1. Use `ls` and `glob` to explore before reading or writing specific files; keep listings targeted to minimise
   output volume.
1. Fetch file contents with `read_file` when context is needed, and rely on pagination parameters for large files to
   avoid oversized responses.
1. Apply edits with `write_file` (create) or `edit_file` (modify), keeping updates concise and UTF-8-only; prefer
   overwriting complete files instead of issuing multiple appends unless streaming logs.
1. Remove stale files or directories with `rm`; recursive deletions mirror the reducer's `DeleteEntry` semantics, so double-check targets before issuing the command.
1. Use `grep` to locate relevant symbols when the project surface grows; remember binary files are skipped by
   default.
1. Avoid mirroring large repositories or binary assets; orchestrated host mounts should stay focused, and the enforced
   size limit still applies.

The section follows the shared prompt conventions (`specs/PROMPTS.md`) and adds all VFS tool definitions to
`RenderedPrompt.tools`.

## Usage Sketch

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass
from weakincentives.runtime.events import InProcessEventBus
from weakincentives.prompt import MarkdownSection, Prompt
from weakincentives.runtime.session import Session
from weakincentives.runtime.session.selectors import select_latest
from weakincentives.tools import vfs

bus = InProcessEventBus()
session = Session(bus=bus)

prompt = Prompt(
    ns="agents/background",
    key="workspace",
    name="workspace-tools",
    sections=[
        MarkdownSection(
            title="Behaviour",
            template="Use the virtual filesystem to stage edits before applying them to the host workspace.",
        ),
        vfs.VfsToolsSection(
            mounts=(
                vfs.HostMount(
                    host_path="docs/",
                    mount_path=vfs.VfsPath(("docs",)),
                    include_glob=("*.md",),
                ),
            ),
        ),
    ],
)

rendered = prompt.render(None)
# Snapshots appear after the first tool invocation; select_latest returns None
# until a handler observes the session.
```

Host mounts are optional; omit the `mounts` argument to start from an entirely empty virtual filesystem.

Adapters emit `ToolInvoked` events through the shared bus; reducers inside `VfsToolsSection` handle persistence
automatically.

## Telemetry

No additional telemetry is required beyond the default event stream. Tool handlers include structured fields in
`ToolInvoked` payloads (path, mode, result size) so downstream analytics can observe usage patterns without custom
instrumentation.

## Testing Checklist

- Unit tests for path normalization and validation, including rejection of absolute paths, `..`, and non-ASCII segments.
- Reducer tests covering create/overwrite/append flows, version increments, and timestamp updates.
- Host mount tests validating allow-list enforcement, glob inclusion/exclusion, `max_bytes` capping, duplicate path
  handling, and deterministic merging when mounts overlap.
- Tests ensuring directory deletion removes all nested files while leaving unrelated paths untouched.
- Prompt snapshot tests verifying `VfsToolsSection` renders instructions and advertises all tools.
- End-to-end scenario: start from the empty VFS (optionally with configured host mounts), list directories, read/write
  files, and confirm session snapshots update with each tool call.

## Documentation Tasks

- Add `vfs_tools_example.py` showing typical usage alongside the planning tools.
- Update `README.md` to mention the virtual filesystem capabilities and link to this specification.
- Generate API reference entries for `VirtualFileSystem`, tool dataclasses, and the handlers in
  `weakincentives.tools.vfs`.
- Document the host mount allow list configuration and security considerations in `AGENTS.md`.
