specs/WINK_DOCS.md, before:

# WINK_DOCS Specification

## Purpose

The `wink docs` CLI subcommand provides access to bundled documentation for
users who install WINK as a package. The interface is optimized for AI coding
agents that need to explore documentation efficiently without overwhelming
their context window.

**Design Principles:**

1. **Progressive disclosure** - List available documents before loading content
1. **Targeted retrieval** - Read individual documents, not bulk dumps
1. **Search-first discovery** - Find relevant content without reading everything
1. **Minimal context cost** - Return only what's needed for the current task

**Implementation:** `src/weakincentives/cli/wink.py`

## CLI Interface

### List Available Documents

```bash
wink docs list                    # List all document categories
wink docs list specs              # List all specs with descriptions
wink docs list guides             # List all guides with descriptions
```

**Output format** (machine-readable for AI parsing):

```
SPECS (34 documents)
────────────────────
ADAPTERS          Provider integrations, structured output, throttling
CLAUDE_AGENT_SDK  Claude Agent SDK adapter, MCP tool bridging, skill mounting
DATACLASSES       Serde utilities, frozen dataclass patterns
DBC               Design-by-contract decorators, exhaustiveness checking
...

GUIDES (25 documents)
─────────────────────
quickstart        Get a working agent running quickly
philosophy        The "weak incentives" approach and why WINK exists
prompts           Build typed, testable prompts
...
```

Descriptions are sourced from:

- `CLAUDE.md` spec table for specs
- `guides/README.md` tables for guides

### Search Documentation

```bash
wink docs search PATTERN                    # Search all docs
wink docs search PATTERN --specs            # Search only specs
wink docs search PATTERN --guides           # Search only guides
wink docs search PATTERN --context 3        # Show N lines of context (default: 2)
wink docs search PATTERN --max-results 10   # Limit results (default: 20)
```

**Output format:**

```
Found 5 matches for "reducer"

specs/SESSIONS.md:42
  Reducers receive `SliceView[S]` and return `SliceOp[S]` operations:

specs/SESSIONS.md:58
  The reducer pattern ensures all state changes are:
  - Deterministic (same input → same output)
  - Auditable (every change traced to an event)

guides/sessions.md:127
  ### Writing Your First Reducer

  A reducer is a pure function that takes the current state and an event,
  returning the new state...
```

Search uses case-insensitive substring matching by default. Regex patterns are
supported with `--regex` flag.

### Read Individual Documents

```bash
wink docs read reference              # llms.md (API reference)
wink docs read changelog              # CHANGELOG.md
wink docs read example                # Code review example

wink docs read spec ADAPTERS          # Single spec by name
wink docs read guide quickstart       # Single guide by name
```

Document names are case-insensitive and `.md` extension is optional.

### Show Table of Contents

```bash
wink docs toc spec SESSIONS           # Show headings from a spec
wink docs toc guide sessions          # Show headings from a guide
```

**Output format:**

```
specs/SESSIONS.md - Table of Contents
─────────────────────────────────────
# SESSIONS Specification
## Purpose
## Core Concepts
### Session
### Events
### Reducers
## Session API
### Creating a Session
### Dispatching Events
### Querying State
## Slice Operations
### Append
### Replace
### Clear
## Transaction Support
## Snapshots
## Thread Safety
```

This allows agents to understand document structure before reading the full
content, enabling targeted reads of specific sections.

## Exit Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 0 | Success |
| 1 | Invalid usage (missing required argument, unknown flag) |
| 2 | Document not found |

## Package Structure

```
src/weakincentives/docs/
├── __init__.py
├── llms.md
├── CHANGELOG.md
├── code_reviewer_example.py
├── guides/
│   ├── README.md
│   ├── quickstart.md
│   └── ...
└── specs/
    ├── ADAPTERS.md
    └── ...

src/weakincentives/cli/
├── docs_metadata.py      # Document descriptions for list command
└── ...
```

**Note:** The `src/weakincentives/docs/` directory is generated during builds by `hatch_build.py` and is intentionally not committed (listed in `.gitignore`). When browsing the repository, you will not see this directory unless you run the build.

### Document Metadata

The `cli/docs_metadata.py` module provides document descriptions:

```python
SPEC_DESCRIPTIONS: dict[str, str] = {
    "ADAPTERS": "Provider integrations, structured output, throttling",
    "CLAUDE_AGENT_SDK": "Claude Agent SDK adapter, MCP tool bridging, skill mounting",
    # ... maintained manually, descriptions sourced from CLAUDE.md spec table
}

GUIDE_DESCRIPTIONS: dict[str, str] = {
    "quickstart": "Get a working agent running quickly",
    "philosophy": "The 'weak incentives' approach and why WINK exists",
    # ... maintained manually, descriptions sourced from guides/README.md tables
}
```

This metadata is maintained in the CLI module (not the docs package) to keep
it separate from the generated documentation files. Descriptions should be
kept in sync with CLAUDE.md and guides/README.md when documents are added or
updated.

## Build-Time Synchronization

Hatch build hook synchronizes docs from repository root into package:

```python
class DocsSyncHook(BuildHookInterface):
    def initialize(self, version, build_data):
        # Copy llms.md, CHANGELOG.md, code_reviewer_example.py
        # Copy guides/*.md, specs/*.md
        # Create __init__.py if needed
        # Use force_include to bypass .gitignore exclusion
```

**Note:** Document descriptions in `cli/docs_metadata.py` are maintained
manually and must be updated when adding new specs or guides.

## AI Agent Workflow

Recommended exploration pattern for AI coding agents:

```bash
# 1. Discover what's available
wink docs list specs

# 2. Search for relevant topics
wink docs search "session state"

# 3. Preview document structure
wink docs toc spec SESSIONS

# 4. Read specific document
wink docs read spec SESSIONS

# 5. Read related guide for usage patterns
wink docs read guide sessions
```

This workflow minimizes context usage while providing comprehensive coverage.

## Security

- Static text files bundled at build time
- Search patterns are sanitized (no shell injection)
- No user-controlled file paths (only predefined document names)
- Output is raw text to stdout

Commit message:

docs(specs): consolidate specs — replace code snippets with code references
Rewrote 26 implemented specs to focus on the why and guiding principles.
Removed ~3200 lines of inline implementation code (usage examples, protocol
class definitions, config boilerplate) and replaced them with prose descriptions
and file path references.

Changed files:
- ACK, AGENT_LOOP, CLAUDE_AGENT_SDK, CLOCK, CODEX_APP_SERVER
- DATACLASSES, DEBUG_BUNDLE, DLQ, EXAMPLES, EXPERIMENTS
- FILESYSTEM, GUARDRAILS, HEALTH, LEASE_EXTENDER, LIFECYCLE
- LOGGING, MAILBOX, PROMPTS, RESOURCE_REGISTRY, RUN_CONTEXT
- SESSIONS, SKILLS, SLICES, TOOLS, TRANSCRIPT, WINK_DOCS

Kept: rationale, design principles, API tables, illustrative short snippets,
ASCII flow diagrams, JSON schema examples.
Removed: usage patterns, protocol class definitions, config boilerplate.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01RQw5AhPHgNRdUPbpHaBmBH

specs/WINK_DOCS.md, after:

# WINK_DOCS Specification

## Purpose

The `wink docs` CLI subcommand provides access to bundled documentation for
users who install WINK as a package. The interface is optimized for AI coding
agents that need to explore documentation efficiently without overwhelming
their context window.

**Design Principles:**

1. **Progressive disclosure** - List available documents before loading content
1. **Targeted retrieval** - Read individual documents, not bulk dumps
1. **Search-first discovery** - Find relevant content without reading everything
1. **Minimal context cost** - Return only what's needed for the current task

**Implementation:** `src/weakincentives/cli/wink.py`

## CLI Interface

### List Available Documents

```bash
wink docs list                    # List all document categories
wink docs list specs              # List all specs with descriptions
wink docs list guides             # List all guides with descriptions
```

**Output format** (machine-readable for AI parsing):

```
SPECS (34 documents)
────────────────────
ADAPTERS          Provider integrations, structured output, throttling
CLAUDE_AGENT_SDK  Claude Agent SDK adapter, MCP tool bridging, skill mounting
DATACLASSES       Serde utilities, frozen dataclass patterns
DBC               Design-by-contract decorators, exhaustiveness checking
...

GUIDES (25 documents)
─────────────────────
quickstart        Get a working agent running quickly
philosophy        The "weak incentives" approach and why WINK exists
prompts           Build typed, testable prompts
...
```

Descriptions are sourced from:

- `CLAUDE.md` spec table for specs
- `guides/README.md` tables for guides

### Search Documentation

```bash
wink docs search PATTERN                    # Search all docs
wink docs search PATTERN --specs            # Search only specs
wink docs search PATTERN --guides           # Search only guides
wink docs search PATTERN --context 3        # Show N lines of context (default: 2)
wink docs search PATTERN --max-results 10   # Limit results (default: 20)
```

**Output format:**

```
Found 5 matches for "reducer"

specs/SESSIONS.md:42
  Reducers receive `SliceView[S]` and return `SliceOp[S]` operations:

specs/SESSIONS.md:58
  The reducer pattern ensures all state changes are:
  - Deterministic (same input → same output)
  - Auditable (every change traced to an event)

guides/sessions.md:127
  ### Writing Your First Reducer

  A reducer is a pure function that takes the current state and an event,
  returning the new state...
```

Search uses case-insensitive substring matching by default. Regex patterns are
supported with `--regex` flag.

### Read Individual Documents

```bash
wink docs read reference              # llms.md (API reference)
wink docs read changelog              # CHANGELOG.md
wink docs read example                # Code review example

wink docs read spec ADAPTERS          # Single spec by name
wink docs read guide quickstart       # Single guide by name
```

Document names are case-insensitive and `.md` extension is optional.

### Show Table of Contents

```bash
wink docs toc spec SESSIONS           # Show headings from a spec
wink docs toc guide sessions          # Show headings from a guide
```

**Output format:**

```
specs/SESSIONS.md - Table of Contents
─────────────────────────────────────
# SESSIONS Specification
## Purpose
## Core Concepts
### Session
### Events
### Reducers
## Session API
### Creating a Session
### Dispatching Events
### Querying State
## Slice Operations
### Append
### Replace
### Clear
## Transaction Support
## Snapshots
## Thread Safety
```

This allows agents to understand document structure before reading the full
content, enabling targeted reads of specific sections.

## Exit Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 0 | Success |
| 1 | Invalid usage (missing required argument, unknown flag) |
| 2 | Document not found |

## Package Structure

```
src/weakincentives/docs/
├── __init__.py
├── llms.md
├── CHANGELOG.md
├── code_reviewer_example.py
├── guides/
│   ├── README.md
│   ├── quickstart.md
│   └── ...
└── specs/
    ├── ADAPTERS.md
    └── ...

src/weakincentives/cli/
├── docs_metadata.py      # Document descriptions for list command
└── ...
```

**Note:** The `src/weakincentives/docs/` directory is generated during builds by `hatch_build.py` and is intentionally not committed (listed in `.gitignore`). When browsing the repository, you will not see this directory unless you run the build.

### Document Metadata

`src/weakincentives/cli/docs_metadata.py` provides `SPEC_DESCRIPTIONS` and
`GUIDE_DESCRIPTIONS` dicts mapping document names to one-line descriptions.
Maintained manually; kept in sync with `CLAUDE.md` and `guides/README.md`
when documents are added or updated.

## Build-Time Synchronization

Hatch build hook (`hatch_build.py`) synchronizes docs from repository root into
the package at build time: copies `llms.md`, `CHANGELOG.md`, guide files, and
spec files into `src/weakincentives/docs/`. Uses `force_include` to bypass
`.gitignore` exclusion. The `src/weakincentives/docs/` directory is generated
at build time and is not committed.

**Note:** Document descriptions in `cli/docs_metadata.py` are maintained
manually and must be updated when adding new specs or guides.

## AI Agent Workflow

Recommended exploration pattern for AI coding agents:

```bash
# 1. Discover what's available
wink docs list specs

# 2. Search for relevant topics
wink docs search "session state"

# 3. Preview document structure
wink docs toc spec SESSIONS

# 4. Read specific document
wink docs read spec SESSIONS

# 5. Read related guide for usage patterns
wink docs read guide sessions
```

This workflow minimizes context usage while providing comprehensive coverage.

## Security

- Static text files bundled at build time
- Search patterns are sanitized (no shell injection)
- No user-controlled file paths (only predefined document names)
- Output is raw text to stdout
